      ~~                                M_A_IN_5_E_AT_I_NG           /




                                              ROm


                    _~_4                                        ~~

                            ,r--------,-'NM-'-R'-ro---------.            "":~
                                          CENTER tiF COURT                 ~
                                                                               03rn




:»                              :»
'"
:»                              '"
                                :»
:0                              :0
                                m
m
.9                              .9
n                               n
0                               0
s:                              s:
"
~
             8.0m               "
                                m
                                -;

a'"          i                  a'"
                                vi
V>
                       I,
V>
m
           ;2.(, 2.1./          "
                                0
~                               V>
                                =<
Z                               0
Gl
                                Z




                                              CJ
                                              -.;;;::7
                                             KAN-SA
~                     MAIN SEATING                       ./

    -----




    Remark: Outer boundary area is a designated safety
            area as in Kumite competition.
~~                      M_A_IN_S_E_AT_I_N_G               /




                             SHU-SHIN




                              ?',



             SHIRO (WHITE)                 AKA (RED)
             COMPETITOR'S                COMPETITOR'S
               POSITION                    POSITION




     Remark: Outer boundary area is a designated safety
             area as in Kumite competition.
                         Article 1
                         General




Kumite competition consists of a match between two persons free
sparring without contact. The winner is determined when a
technique meets the requirements of Todome-waza (finishing blow),
which combines proper physical execution, correct timing, Ma-ai
(effective distance), and the competition designated target zone. If
there is no Todome-waza, the winner is the competitor with the
highest number of points received for effective techniques and/or
opponent's penalties.




a)      Men's Individual
b)      Women's Individual (Ko-go Kumite)
c)      Men's Team (3 persons)




A.      The competition area shall have a flat, semi-shock
        absorbent surface with necessary measures taken for the
        safe operations ofthe match and the prevention of any
        hazard.

B.      The size of the Competition Area shall be eight meters
        square measured from the outer boundary lines. In addition,
        there shall be an out-of-boundary safety area. This safety
        area must also conform to the same flat surface and non-
        hazardous requirements of the Competition Area.

C.      Two parallel lines, each one-half meter long, shall be
        drawn on both sides of the center point of the competition
        area. These lines shall be at a distance of 1.5 meters from
                             11
          the center point. The lines shall be perpendicular to the line
          where the Shu-shin (Referee) stands at the beginning of the
          match. The two parallel lines shall be the standing lines for
          the competitors.

D.        Placement of the Court Judges, Kan-sa (Arbitrator) and the
          Court Clerks must be in accordance with the Appendix I.

E.        The Competition Area must be well ventilated with a
          recommended room temperature in the approximate range
          of 15 C (60 F) to 24 C (75 F) with humidity at 40% to 80%
          and illumination of the competition area is minimum 400
          Lux, air velocity from 0 up to 1.5 m/sec.

F.        The Competition Area must be free of nonessential
          encumbrances and restraints to the competition. This shall
          include but not be limited to such distractions as excessive
          film or videotape lighting during the competition.

Remark:
          Competition Area Diagram is found in Appendix I.




A.        Ippon is defined as full point that is awarded for the
          execution of Todome (finishing blow) technique with
          correct Timing and Ma-ai (effective distance) at an
          established body target whereupon the opponent's
          offensive capability would be completely neutralized.




                 (a) Maximum energy is delivered to the target by
                     combining the pressure reaction from the floor
                     with the line of body momentum. At the final
                     stage of delivery, maximum floor pressure
                     coupled with sharp and total muscular
                     contraction is necessary to produce maximum
                     shocking power to the target area (Kirne).
      (b) Body stability must be maintained with a strong
          stance or momentum during the execution of the
          technique to withstand the reaction shock of
          impact. (Balance).

      (c) Retention of mental and physical equilibrium
          immediately after the execution of the technique
          must be maintained (Zan-shin).

(2)   Correct timing refers to the opportunistic execution
       of a        technique at precisely that moment
       when the opponent's mental and/or physical
       capacities are disjointed or in Kyo (Off).




                    Extreme emotional instability such as
                    fear, anger, anxiety or stupor.

                    Extreme loss of will, vitality and
                    resolution to fight.

                    Extreme loss of foresight resulting in
                    disjointed or lapsed attentiveness.




                     Time period just at the beginning and
                     during technique execution.

                     Gap in between techniques or break in
                     the continuation of a technique.

        Remark:
             During Keri (kicking), only by exerting
             pressure to the floor through the supporting
             leg at the fmal stage of leg extension can
             maximum energy be produced. After
             delivery of technique, execute a strong
                    13
                   pullback of leg to retain strong balance for
                   next movement.

                   In the case of Keri, which does not receive an
                   adequate block, the technique is then
                   considered to have had correct timing.

     (3)     Correct Ma-ai refers to the use of the most
             effective distance for the technique executed
             combined with the most opportunistic timing. The
             position must be so that the technique is not over-
             extended but in proper proximity to deliver
             Todome. The distance should be such that the
             proper contact area of the technique makes full and
             effective impact on the target. Distance
             requirements per targets at impact time are as
             follows:

             Jo-dan (face area) = Approximately 5 centimeters
             or less.                          /. 9 {, '/
                                                          /" /. /8
             Chu-dan (stomach area) = Approximately 3
             centimeters or less. Except for Keri, which allows
             5 centimeters, or less.

             Angle requirements are approximately     80 to 100
             degrees.

B.   Waza-ari is defined as the execution of an effective
     technique which falls short of meeting the criteria for Ippon
     as follows:




     (2)     At focus time, either stance or momentum, or both
             are slightly off;

     (3)     Retention of mental and physical equilibrium
             immediately after the execution of the technique is
             slightly off;
(5)      Distance is slightly off, i.e. too close for effective
         use of technique.

Remark:
   If distance is off, i.e. not reaching target, then there is
   no Ippon or Waza-ari.




No point shall be awarded in the following situations even
though the technique is effective:

(1)      When opponent initiates attack, technique must be
         covered, blocked, or evaded. Ifnot, counter-attack
         technique does not count as scored point and is
         subject to Mu-shi (ignored technique) penalty.
         Exception: Ken technique which uses "Sen" (early
         timing initiates opponent's move) against
         opponent's hand technique and Ken competitor
         has superior reach;

(2)      The executed technique moves in one direction,
         while the body is retreating or breaking away in
         the opposite direction (Nige- TsukiJUchi/ Ate/Geri);

(3)      The technique is executed after the opponent is
         grabbed (Tsuka-mi). Simultaneous grabbing and
         technique execution are acceptable;

(4)      The follow-up technique is not executed
         continuously and immediately in the case where
         the opponent either slips and falls or is caused to
         fall by a preceding technique.




(1)      Back-leg and back-leg side hand techniques may
         be Ippon or Waza-ari. This refers to the beginning
         position of the technique.
     (2)     Front-leg and front-leg side hand techniques are
             only Waza-ari.

     Remark:
     In the case of a stance, where both feet are parallel
     (distance parallel being within the length of a person's foot),
     then front-leg rule applies.



     In the following cases, upgrading may take place wherein a
     recognized Waza-ari technique may be upgraded to Ippon
     and wherein a technique short ofWaza-ari is upgraded to
     Waza-ari:

     (I)      When the execution of the technique evokes no
              reaction from the opponent who is caught totally
              unprepared mentally.

     (2)      When the opponent is physically unable to mount
              any defensive effort due to induced physical Kyo.
              Example: balance broken.

F.   Qualified Scoring Techniques and the Parts of the Body
     which are Used




                       (i)     Basic Power:
                               Strong quick body action
                               (rotation, shifting, lifting,
                               dropping, vibration, body
                               contraction-expansion, etc.) using
                               the floor as base. This force is
                               extended through the arm line.
        Arm movement is generated from
        maximum speed of body
        movement. Rotation of shoulder
        joint followed by extension of
        elbow joint further increases the
        body power. The angle of the
        extension must be 45° or more.

(iii)   Kime (Impact):
        At the final moment of impact,
        both feet must be firmly in
        contact with the floor
        accompanied by a strong, sharp
        contraction along technique line
        during one strong, complete
        breathing period with pressure to
        the floor and total body.

Remark:
   Kizami-zuki (front-leg side punch) is
   only acceptable when target is Jo-dan.




(i)     Basic Power:
        Strong, sharp body action
        (rotation, shifting, lifting,
        dropping, vibration, body
        contraction-expansion, etc.) using
        floor as base. This force is
        transmitted through the side of
        the arm.

(ii)    Arm Movement:
        Arm movement is generated from
        maximum speed of body
        movement. Rotation of shoulder
        joint followed by snap action of
        elbow joint further increases the
        body power. The angle of the
        elbow snap must be 45° or more.
(iii)   Kime (Impact):
        At final moment of impact, both
        feet must be firmly in contact
        with the floor. At moment of
        elbow snap, there must be strong,
        sharp body contraction along
        technique line during one strong,
        complete breathing period with
        pressure to the floor and total
        body contraction. In case of Ura-
        ken-uchi (Back Fist Strike),
        technique is acceptable also if
        stance is strongly based on one
        foot with only the heel of the
        other foot not in full contact.

Remark:
   Uchi is only recognized as point when
   delivered to lo-dan. Chu-dan is not
   acceptable.




(i)     Basic Power:
        Strong, quick body action
        (rotation, shifting, lifting or
        dropping) using floor as base.
        This force is extended through
        elbow.

(ii)    Arm Movement:
        Arm movement is generated from
        maximum speed of shoulder joint,
        which further increases body
        power. The angle of the rotation
        of the shoulder joint must be 45°
        or more.
(iii)   Kime (Impact):
        At final moment of impact, both
        feet must be firmly in contact
        with the floor accompanied by a
        strong, sharp contraction along
        technique line during one strong,
        complete breathing period with
        pressure to the floor and total
        body contraction.




(i)     Basic Power:
        Strong, quick body action
        (pendulum or rotation) using
        floor as base. This force is
        extended through knee joint.

(ii)    Leg Movement:
        Hip joint movement generates
        increased body power. Angle of
        hip joint flexion must be 90° or
        more.

(iii)   Kime (Impact):
        At final moment of impact,
        support foot must be firmly
        planted on floor accompanied by
        strong, sharp body contraction
        along technique line during one
        strong, complete breathing period
        with pressure to the floor and
        total body contraction.




(i)     Basic Power:
        Strong body movement
        (pendulum or rotation) using
        floor as base. This force is
        extended through side of the leg
        line.

(ii)    Leg Movement:
        Leg movement is generated from
        maximum speed of body
        movement and rotation of hip
        joint and knee-snap action, which
        increases the body power. The
        angle of the knee snap action
        must be 90° or more.

(iii)   Kime (Impact):
        At final moment of impact,
        support foot must be firmly
        planted on floor. Complete body
        force is applied with sharp snap-
        back making very short contact
        time for increased impact power.
        The angle of knee snap and snap-
        back action must be 90° or more.
        Also, total action should be
        accomplished in one complete
        breath.

Remark:
   Jump-kick is recognized as a point,
   only if Keri is delivered during ascent
   rather than during descent.




(i)     Basic Power:
        Strong body action (pendulum)
        using floor as base. This force is
        extended through the straight
        thrusting line ofleg.
                     Leg movement is generated from
                     maximum speed of body
                     movement and rotation of hip
                     joint and knee-thrust action,
                     which increases the body power.
                      The angle of the knee extension
                     must be 90° or more.

        (iii)        Kime (Impact):
                     At final moment of impact,
                     support foot must be firmly
                     planted on floor accompanied by
                     strong, sharp body contraction
                     along technique line during one
                     strong, complete breathing period
                     with pressure to the floor and
                     total contraction with leg and
                     body.

                     At the end of Kime, squeeze back
                     leg to reestablish balance. At
                     time of both knee extension
                     (thrust) and flexion (squeeze
                     back), the angle of knee action
                     must be 90° or more.

        Remark:
           Jump-kick is recognized as a point,
           but Keri line must be same line as
           either ascending (rising) line or
           descending (dropping) line.




Sei-ken (fore-fist)
Ura-ken (back-fist)
Shu-to (Knife-hand)
Hai-to (Ridge-hand)
Enpi (Elbow)
Koshi (Ball of Foot)
Soku-to (Side of Foot)
                21
        En-sho (Heel of Foot)
        Hit-tsui (Knee)




All Judges for a respective tournament must meet together
at least twenty-four hours prior to the commencement of
the tournament in order to ensure the uniform and
consistent awarding of points based on the same standard.




Face from eyebrow line to top of ears (not including ears)
and around the chin.




From above the belt (waistline) to an imaginary line on the
upper chest extending from armpit to armpit, not to include
the side of the body.

Only in the case of an opponent who presents a "back
position" is it permitted to include the sides of the body and
the back as targets so long as these targets do not exceed
Chu-dan.

Remarks:
   A "back position" is defined as a body area (at Chu-
   dan level) exposed when stance or body position is at
   least 90 degrees turned from direct frontal presentation
   to opponent (i.e. facing opponent). This also includes
   situation where back is exposed as competitor falls to
   ground.




I)       Eyes [Attack by Nuki-te (Spear hand)]
2)       Base of the Skull
3)       Throat
A.   The duration of the competition shall be based on "action
     time" not running time. That is, the time of the match shall
     be only that time where actual competition action is taking
     place.

     Effective time shall commence with the Shu-shin's
     announcement of "Hajime" (Begin) or "Tsuzukete Hajime"
     (Begin to Continue). Effective time shall terminate with
     the Shu-shin's announcement of "Yame" (Stop) or "Jo-gai"
     (Out of Bounds).

     Effective time shall also stop when the Shu-shin indicates
     the awarding of a point. However, if the Shu-shin then
     indicates the cancellation of the awarding of a point, then
     the effective time shall resume immediately with the
     cancellation signal. When the athletes themselves and not
     the Shu-shin stop the match, effective time shall continue to
     run until one of the competitors returns to the original
     position.

     A technique delivered simultaneously with the time-up
     signal shall be considered as within the effective time. This
     includes a point scoring technique, penalty or other rules
     violation.

B.   Techniques delivered after the time-up signal are not
     considered as part of the effective time and are
     consequently not regarded for scoring or penalizing
     purposes. This applies even in those cases where the Shu-
     shin does not announce "Yame" although the time-up
     signal has been given.

C.   The time-up signal shall be given by the Timer and shall
     consist of two short repetitions from a bell, buzzer or gong.
     Thirty seconds before the time-up signal is given, a
     warning signal shall be given by the Timer consisting of a
     single, short sound from a bell, buzzer or gong.



A.   Jo-gai refers to the crossing of the Court boundary lines and
     the making of floor contact by any part of the competitor's
     body outside of the Court. This violation occurs where the
     Shu-shin has not announced either "Yame" or the awarding
     ofa point.

B.   Techniques delivered outside the match area shall be
     invalid. The exception shall be where the attacking
     competitor executes a technique completely within the
     Court area that simultaneously results in the opponent
     being Jo-gai.




     A competitor who is Jo-gai twice during a match shall be
     penalized by having his opponent awarded Waza-ari. If the
     competitor is Jo-gai twice more in the same individual
     match, another Waza-ari shall be awarded.

     Remarks:
       (1) Ifboth competitors Jo-gai then the first competitor
            who is Jo-gai shall be penalized and not the other.
            Ifboth contestants are simultaneously Jo-gai, there
            shall be no penalty to either.

        (2)   In the case where a technique is executed and then
              either or both competitors Jo-gai before the Shu-
              shin indicates "Yame", neither competitor shall be
              penalized as Jo-gai if the technique is subsequently
              recognized as a point. However, if the technique is
              not point scoring, then the first competitor to Jo-
              gai shall be penalized.
      (3)   In the case where a competitor commits an act that
            mayor may not be a violation (such as a body
            blow) and then either or both competitors are Jo-
            gai before the Shu-shin announces "Yame" or
            indicates a violation, neither competitor shall be
            penalized for that specific Jo-gai if the act is
            subsequently declared a violation. However, if the
            act is not found to be a violation, then the first
            competitor to Jo-gai shall be penalized.




(I)         In the case where a competitor falls and makes
            contact with the floor with other than feet or hands
            but a point scoring technique is not given nor
            received, a Ten-to penalty shall be applied. A fall
            may be self-induced or caused by the opponent.

            Remarks:
               (a)     Ifboth competitors fall, only the first to
                       do so shall be penalized. In the case
                       where both fall simultaneously, neither
                       competitor shall be penalized.

                       In the case where a technique is
                       executed and then either or both
                       competitors fall before the Shu-shin
                       announces "Yame" or awards a point,
                       neither competitor shall have the Ten-
                       to penalty applied if the technique is
                       subsequently recognized as a point.
                       However, if the technique is not point
                       scoring, then the first competitor to fall
                       shall be penalized.

                        In the case where a competitor falls as a
                        result of an opponent's attempted
                        Todome-waza that makes any physical
                        contact, a Ten-to penalty shall not be
                        applied against the fallen competitor
      regardless of whether or not the
      executed technique is a violation.

(d)   In the case where a competitor falls and
      is Jo-gai, both the Jo-gai penalty and
      the Ten-to penalty shall be applied.
      When one competitor is Jo-gai and the
      other falls, then each receives their
      respective penalty.




(a)   The Ten-to penalty competitor moves
      back to the center of the boundary line
      with both heels on the line in Shizen-tai
      (open-leg natural stance).

(b)   Non-penalized competitor moves
      forward to face penalized competitor in
      Shizen-tai position. Both extend hands
      at arms length with tips of fingers
      touching, and then both return to
      Shizen-tai positions. The match shall
      resume from this position.




(a)   If non-penalized competitor does not
      move within 5 seconds, then penalty is
      voided and competitors now resume
      regular match from original starting
      positions.

(b)   If fall occurs and match time is over,
      with no time for execution of penalty,
      then non-penalized competitor receives
      one point (1.0) after penalty
      confirmation by Fuku-shin (Comer
      Judges).
                        During penalty match, if time is called,
                        penalty match is over and no points are
                        awarded.

                 (c)    Penalized competitor who moves
                        before non-penalized competitor
                        receives Jo-gai penalty. Any
                        movement including fake or foot
                        movement, by non-penalized
                        competitor in starting position is
                        recognized as a move.

                 (d)    In order to counter-attack, including
                        use of Keri, penalized competitor must
                        defend (cover, block, or evade, etc.)
                        against attack initiated by non-
                        penalized competitor from starting
                        position. If penalized competitor fails
                        to defend before initiating counter-
                        attack, then counter-attack is not
                        recognized as a point scored and
                        competitor receives Mu-shi penalty.

                 (e)    After non-penalized competitor moves
                        from starting position and neither
                        competitor scores a point, the penalty
                        match is voided and the match
                        continues as a regular match.




A.   Sweeping techniques applied at the knee joint are expressly
     prohibited. Blocking and sweeping techniques applied to
     the upper and lower limbs shall be permitted.
F.   Grabbing without an immediate follow-up Todome-waza,
     clinching, pushing or bodily crashing against the opponent
     (Tsuka-mi);

G.   Dangerous throwing or balance-breaking techniques (Kin-
     shi);

H.   Completely ignores opponent's initiated technique without
     making defense (Mu-shi);

I.   Unsportsmanlike behavior between competitors such as
     verbal abuse, goading or other similar provocations (Fu-
     kei);

J.   Self-promotion, celebrating or other similarly unbecoming
     conduct in the Court area (Fu-kei);



L.   Ignoring, resisting or disobeying the instructions of the
     Shu-shin (Chui-mushi);

M.   A wild flurry of attacks or uncontrolled techniques or
     "blind attacks" (Mo-da).

N.   Any other violations of the Competition Rules or other
     actions not specifically covered herein that interfere with
     the operation of the competition.



A.   Violations where the intent is inadvertent or accidental
     shall result in the issuance of Kei-koku.

     Chui shall automatically result if the same offender
     commits another Kei-koku-type violation during the same
     match.
B.   Violations and the situations where the intent to violate is
     clear but the infraction is not fully executed shall result in a
     Chui to the offender.

     Han-soku shall automatically result if the same offender
     commits another Chui-type violation during the same
     match.

C.   When a competitor commits a prohibited act, Han-soku
     shall be issued. Han-soku shall result in the competitor's
     immediate loss of the match.




     The sanctions assessed due to contact during the match
     shall be based upon the following:



           CIRCUMSTANCES                     TYPE OF CONTACT

           Opponent moves into               Minor
      A.   direction of technique       1.   No injury.
           (De-ai).
                                              Light
           Opponent maintains
      B.                                2.    Light injury and/or light
           stationery position.
                                              body shock.
           Opponent moves away                Moderate
      C.   from direction of            3.    Moderate injury and/or
           technique.                         moderate body shock.
                                              Heavv
                                        4.    Heavy injury and/or
                                              heavy body shock.




      TYPE & CIRCUMSTANCE                      SANCTIONS

                   A-I              None, but point scoring possibility

                   A-2              None, but point scoring possibility

                   A-3                           Kei-koku

                   A-4                           Han-soku
           B-1                None, but point scoring possibility

           B-2                             Kei-koku

           B-3                               Chui

           B-4                             Han-soku

           C-I                None, but point scoring possibility

           C-2                               Chui

           C-3                             Han-soku

           C-4                             Han-soku



Remarks:
   (a)     Decisions about the type of contact are made by
           the Medical Judge according to ITKF Medical
           Rules.

           Skin touch causing no injury and/or body shock
           will not be penalized (minor contact).

           If contact is made after the Shu-shin announces
           "Y ame", then Chui in case of skin touch or
           Han-soku if light or heavier contact. However,
           if the contact is the fault of the recipient or if it
           is purely accidental, then no violation shall be
           found.




If during competition, a competitor appears to be sick or
injured, for example, as a result of contact, then the
Medical Judge shall examine that competitor and if found
to be feigning, Shi-kkaku (disqualification) shall be
declared.




If competitors can not execute techniques as required by
the Kumite Rules for a Todome or do not have the ability to
execute defense techniques, then Shi-kkaku as Mu-no.
                     30
A.     In the case where a competitor's ability to continue
       becomes impaired due to injury or sickness during a match
       (not caused by the opponent), the competitor's match shall
       be terminated by Doctor's Stop if, following the medical
       decisions, the impairment period is expected to exceed five
       minutes.

B.     A competitor who has been declared the winner of two
       matches by default during the respective tournament, as a
       result of the opponent's contact Han-soku, shall
       automatically be subject to Doctor's Stop. Such a
       competitor shall be deemed ineligible for Medical
       Approval and consequently cannot continue further Kumite
       competition in that tournament.

       Remarks:
          The aforementioned restriction shall not apply in the
          case where Han-soku is issued against an opponent on
          the basis of two Chui where only one is the result of
          contact and the other is not.



Any competitor that Ki-ken from a competition shall forfeit the
match. In the case of a team match, if anyone member Ki-ken from
a match then the entire team shall forfeit.



A.      A competitor's Coach shall have the right to lodge a protest
        through the respective Court's Kan-sa only on the basis that
        the operation of match has been in violation of the
        Competition Rules.

B.      The Coach cannot protest the Court Judges' Decision or
        Medical Decision(s) so long as it is based upon the
        Competition Rules.
C.   The Coach's protest must be lodged before either
     competitor leaves the Court.

D.   In the case where a Coach wishes to protest the operation
     of the match, the protest must be made to the respective
     Court's Kan-sa and not directly at the Court Judge(s).

E.   The Coach's protest must be indicated to the Kan-sa before
     competitor(s) withdraws from the Court so that the Kan-sa
     may then direct the Shu-shin to keep the competitors in the
     Court area. The Kan-sa shall then have the opportunity to
     listen to the Coach's protest.

F.   The Coach's protest explanation shall not exceed five
     minutes. Once a decision has been reached on a specific
     protest, that decision shall be final. No further protest
     appeals shall be tolerated. In the case where a Coach
     persists in contesting the protest decision, the Kan-sa shall
     have the authority to eject that Coach from the competition
     area.




     Kumite competition shall be based on a Single Elimination
     System (see Appendix IV). However, by a decision of the
     corresponding Tournament Controlling Body, the
     Repechage System may be substituted.

     The Repechage System involves single eliminations
     leading to the finals. In addition, the third place match
     winner shall be determined by match eliminations among
     all the remaining losing opponents of the first eliminations.
     (See Appendix V)



     Seeding shall be based on competitors from the same
     country and teams from the same continent.
By decision of the Tournament Controlling Body, the
winners of the previous tournament bearing the same
tournament title-name may be seeded first to fourth place.




Placement shall be by random open drawing exclusive of
any control by any person.




The Tournament Organizing Committee shall select and
assign the following Court Clerks for each Court:




The Kan-sa for each respective Court shall direct the Court
Clerks assigned to that Court.




                Article 2
               Competition
All competitors shall wear white Karate uniforms (Karate-gi) in
accordance with the standard set by the Technical Committee (See
Appendix XXI) and subject to the following conditions:

A.      Karate-gi top must be long enough to reach the groin area
        but not cover knees. The sleeves must cover the elbow but
        not cover the wrists.




B.      The Karate-gi belt must be tied at the waist between the
        bottom of the rib cage and above the hipbone. The tied
        ends of the belt shall not be longer than the knees.




A.      Fist covers must be used so that in case of accidental
        contact, there is protection against blood borne pathogens.
        Only official ITKF approved by the Technical Committee
        and Medical Committee fist covers shall be used.

B.      Mouth guard must be used to reduce a chance of injury in
        case of accidental contact.



        I)      Groin-protector (plastic or metal are acceptable)
        2)      Sports bra for Women

D.      Supportive neoprene or elastic type bandages are not
        permitted. Subject to Medical Approval by the ITKF
        Medical Judge, tape wrapped only twice around is allowed.
E.   Neither eyeglasses nor contact lenses are permitted. As an
     exception, soft contact lenses are allowed subject to
     Medical Approval by the ITKF Medical Judge.




                      The competition time shall be one and a
                      half minutes. The competitor who first
                      scores Ippon or Awase-waza (2 Waza-ari)
                      within the time period shall be declared
                      the winner.




                      The competitors shall meet in three sets of
                      Ippon Sho-bu. The winner of two sets
                      shall be declared the winner.

                      Each set shall have a break of thirty
                      seconds between sets. Each set is separate
                      and distinct. Points shall not be
                      cumulative and penalties shall not carry
                      over. Han-soku in any set shall result in
                      the loss of the entire match by the
                      offender.




             In either the case of Ippon Sho-bu or San-bon Sho-
             bu where there are insufficient points or set
             victories to determine a winner, the match winner
             shall be the competitor with the highest total score
             as defined under "Scoring" (See Article 2-3-A-(4)).
             If the scores are the same, a Hiki-wake (Draw)
             shall be declared.
                         35
 In the case of a Hiki-wake where it is necessary to
 determine a match winner, then Kettei-sen shall
 immediately take place without any rest period.
 The time period for Kettei-sen shall be one and
 one half minutes. The first competitor to be
 awarded either Waza-ari or Ippon shall be declared
 the match winner.

 There shall be no carry-over whatsoever of any
 preceding match points or penalties.

 If at the end of Kettei-sen, the match winner has
 still not been determined because of either no
 points or equal score, then the Court Judges shall
 be required to decide the winner since there can
 not be another Hiki-wake.




 The following scoring shall be used in the case
 where neither Ippon nor Awase-waza has been
 awarded to either competitor at the end of
 competition time.


              AWARD & PENALTY                     SCORE

I.   Waza-ari (semi-full point)                     4

2.   Opponent receives Chui                         4

3.   Opponent commits Jo-gai*                       2

4.   Opponent receives Kei-koku**                   2
     Opponent awarded Ten-to penalty but
5.                                                  I
     not executed due to expiration of time
6.   Effective technique     (per technique )**     1

7.   Fighting spirit***                             1

8.   Fighting etiquette***                          I
Remarks:
           (a)     *No points shall be awarded if
                   Waza-ari has already been
                   awarded. A third Jo-gai can
                   result in points awarded.

                   **No points shall be awarded if
                   Chui has already been awarded.
                   A third Kei-koku can result in
                   points awarded.

                   ***Point additions for "Effective
                   Technique", "Fighting Spirit",
                   and "Fighting Etiquette" shall be
                   awarded only during Kettei-sen
                   involving tied scored at which
                   time Court Judges will meet to
                   decide winner.




(a)        At competition time, the members from
           each team shall each compete in one and
           one half minute's rounds against the other
           team's members in the exact order in
           which they registered. The higher total
           score between the teams shall determine
           the winning team. A match will end when
           one team member is awarded Ippon
           (including two Waza-ari).

(b)        In the case of a Ten-to penalty, which is
           awarded but not executed during the
                round due to time expiration, the opposing
                team receives a point.

     (c)         If any team member receives Han-soku,
                 then the entire team shall receive Han-
                 soku. However, if a team member
                 receives Chui or Kei-koku, that penalty
                 shall not be carried over from round to
                 round to another member of the team.

     (d)         If any team member Ki-ken (withdraws)
                 from the competition, then the entire team
                 shall be considered as Ki-ken, thereby
                 resulting in a forfeit.




                      AWARD & PENALTY                   SCORE

I.         Ippon by Ippon Technique                       10


2.         Waza-ari                                       4


3.         Opponent commits Jo-gai (each infraction)      2


4.         Opponent receives Chui                         4

           Opponent receives Kei-koku (each
5.                                                        2
           infraction)

           Opponent receives Ten-to penalty but not
6.                                                        I
           executed due to expiration of time

           Opponent receives Doctor's Stop in case of
7.                                                        4
           self-caused injury or illness



     Remark:
                 All match records shall remain valid even
                 if a competitor is subject to a Doctor's
                 Stop.
(a)   In the case ofa tie score between the
      teams, the outcome shall be determined by
      a Kettei-sen by Representative. Each
      team shall select its own respective
      Representative to compete against the
      Representative selected by the opposing
      team. The Representative selected must
      be chosen from among the actual
      competing members of each respective
      team. Alternate team members shall be
      ineligible.

(b)   In the Kettei-sen by Representative, the
      Court Judges must determine the winner
      on the basis of only what took place
      during the match. Therefore, the team
      having the Representative winner shall be
      declared the victor.

(c)   Rules of Representative by Kettei-sen are
      same as Rules of Individual Kettei-sen.
      (Article 2-3-A-(3))




(a)   Shu-shin shall direct the competitors to
      their places in the Court area. The
      competitors shall then bow to Shu-shin,
      then to one another on the command of
      the Shu-shin who shall say the word,
      "Rei" (Bow). The competitors shall then
      go into the Shizen-tai position.
         39
(b)   The start of the competition is called the
      "Shobu lppon Hajime".

(c)   To temporarily stop the competition, the
      Shu-shin shall use the word "Yame" or
      "Jo-gai" and signal accordingly. At these
      times, the competitors shall return to their
      starting places and assume the Shizen-tai
      position.

      The competition shall resume upon the
      order of the Shu-shin, which is called
      "Tsuzukete- Hajime".

(d)   All pronouncements, including the
      declaration of the match winner, the
      awarding of points, notice of violations
      and penalties, shall be made by the Shu-
      shin from the designated place in the
      Competition Area.

      Each competitor shall acknowledge said
      pronouncements by lightly bowing to the
      Shu-shin, regardless of which athlete is
      the subject of the pronouncement.

(e)   When the match is completed, each athlete
      shall bow to the other on the command of
      the Shu-shin who shall say "Rei".

(t)   During the match, when the Timer gives
      the signal of one ring of bell or gong that
      there are 30 seconds remaining before the
      end of the match, the Shu-shin shall give
      notice of "Shibaraku" (30 seconds
      remaining) to both competitors. However,
      the match does not stop upon the notice of
      Shibaraku.
(g)   At the end of the match, the Timer shall
      signal by strikes on the bell of gong that
      "time is up". At that moment, the Shu-
      shin shall stop the match by announcing
      "Yame". The competitors shall return to
      their starting positions. The end of the
      match, which is called "Sore-made" (end
      of the match), shall then be announced by
      the Shu-shin while simultaneously giving
      the Sore-made signal of the right hand
      stretched straight ahead (parallel to the
      floor) with palm facing forward.

      The Shu-shin shall then ask for the score
      from the Kan-sa. As soon as this is
      known, the Shu-shin shall announce the
      score and award the match to the winner.
      In the case of a tie score, then the Shu-
      shin shall announce "Hiki-wake".

      In the case of Hiki-wake, the competitors
      shall remain in the Competition Area in
      the Shizen-tai position.

(h)   In the case of the Kettei-sen, the notice
      shall be given by the Shu-shin as "Kettei-
      sen Hajime". The Kettei-sen shall use the
      same competition sequence as that given
      in (b) through (g) as above (Regular
      Match) except that if either competitor
      receives Waza-ari or Ippon, then that
      competitor shall be declared the match
      winner.

(i)   If at the end of Kettei-sen the score is still
      tied with no points having been awarded,
      then the Shu-shin shall call a Court Judges
      Meeting. The Court Judges Meeting shall
      then decide the winner of the match.
      Following the meeting, the Fuku-shin
      shall return to their places. The Shu-shin
         41
              shall then stand one meter outside the
              competition line (opposite from the main
              seating area) and announce "Han-tei"
              (Decision). The announcement shall
              involve the declaration of Han-tei
              followed by one long whistle and then a
              short whistle. When the short whistle is
              blown, the Fuku-shin shall simultaneously
              raise the flags of the winner decided by
              Court Judges Meeting. A second short
              whistle shall signal the Fuku-shin to lower
              their flags.

              The Shu-shin shall then step into the
              Competition Area and announce the
              winner of the match.

      (j)     During a Court Judges Meeting during a
              match, the competitors shall face away
              from each other from the "Competitor's
              Position" and assume Sei-za (formal floor
              sitting position) until the end of the
              meeting. In the event that the meeting
              exceeds one minute in duration, the Shu-
              shin shall instruct the competitors to
              return to their respective competitor's
              seating areas.

      (k)     As soon as the results are announced by
              the Shu-shin the competitors shall bow to
              one another on the Shu-shin's command
              to "Rei". They shall leave the competition
              area.




(2)   Competition
                    42
Other than the following, the sequence for team
matches shall be the same as for individual
matches.

(a)     Before each team match, the team
        members shall line up at the opposite
        boundary lines (right and left of the main
        front seating area). On the Shu-shin's
        command of "Rei", each side shall bow to
        the other. After bowing, the competitors
        shall return to their seats to wait.

(b)     Each match shall begin with the Shu-
        shin's announcement of "Hajime". Each
        match shall run for one and once half
        minutes or until one side scores Ippon
        (including 2 Waza-ari).

(c)     At the end of each match, the Shu-shin
        shall declare "sore-made" and the next
        match shall follow immediately.

(d)      When the final team competitors have
         completed their match, then the procedure
         followed shall be the same as in an
         Individual Match. The Shu-shin shall then
         direct the competitors to line up as in (a)
         above. The winning team shall then be
         declared by the Shu-shin. Following this
         declaration, on the Shu-shin's command
         of "Rei", the competitors shall bow to one
         another and then depart from the
         Competition Area.

         In the case of a tie score, the Shu-shin
         shall announce Hiki-wake. The team shall
         not line up. Instead, the Shu-shin shall
         ask each team for a Representative.
                 (e)     The Kettei-sen by Representative shall
                         follow immediately. The Kettei-sen by
                         Representative procedure shall be same as
                         for Individual Kettei-sen (See Article 2-4-
                         A-(2)-(h) & (i)).

                         The procedure for the declaration of the
                         winning team shall be the same as given
                         in (d) above.




                         Article 3
                         Judging




All Judges must follow the required dress code set by the Technical
Committee.




        one Shu-shin (Referee)
        four Fuku-shin (Comer Judge)

The Chief Judge shall make all judging assignments and comer
placements. Only the Chief Judge may make changes of
assignment of placement. However, the Kan-sa at each Court may
appeal to the Chief Judge for consideration of changes of
assignments of placement.

The Chief Judge is empowered to delegate authority to an Assistant
Chief Judge assigned to a separate Court.
B.   The Fuku-shin must each possess a whistle and a set of Aka
     (red) and Shiro (white) flags.




A.   A Kan-sa, assigned by the Chief Judge, shall be present at
     each Court.

B.   A Kan-sa must possess a whistle and a set of Aka (red) and
     Shiro (white) flags.

C.   The Kan-sa's right and responsibilities   at the respective
     Court shall be as follows:

     (I)      To arbitrate the operation of the matches and
              immediately seek to correct through the Shu-shin
              any discovered violations of the Competition Rules.

     (2)      To respond to any questions from the Shu-shin as
              they relate to the operation of the competition.

     (3)      To maintain a record of the competition so as to
              answer any inquiries from the Shu-shin and to
              substantiate the work of the Recorder.

     (4)      To monitor the competition times and to correct
              any discrepancies by immediately notifying the
              Shu-shin.

              In the case where the time expires but the
              competition inadvertently continues, then the Kan-
              sa must immediately notify the Shu-shin as well as
              the Recorder with an order to stop. The Recorder
              shall the void all records made after the order to
              stop had been given.

     (5)      When monitoring the competition, if the Kan-sa
              believes there is favoritism or unfairness on the
              part of any Judge(s), the Kan-sa shall request the
                          45
                 Shu-shin to issue a warning to the offending
                 Judge(s). If after the Shu-shin's warning, the
                 unfairness continues uncorrected, then the Kan-sa
                 may appeal to the Chief Judge to have the
                 offending Judge(s) removed.

        (6)      The Kan-sa shall weigh the merits per the
                 Competition Rules and then decide whether or not
                 to order corrections through the Shu-shin of any
                 Coach's protest received against the Competition
                 Rules.

                 In the case where a Court Judge has already made
                 a decision subsequently discovered to be against .
                 the Competition Rules, then the Kan-sa shall order
                 the Shu-shin to ask for a Prejudgment.




Competition decisions shall be based upon a majority vote of the
Court Judges. The Shu-shin shall have two votes and the Fuku-shin
shall each have one vote. In case of a tie, the Fuku-shin majority
shall determine the decision. Exceptions to the foregoing shall be in
the case of penalties, violations and points where a Fuku-shin does
not observe the action in question. Such a Fuku-shin shall have no
part in the decision-making.

The Kan-sa, having no voting rights, shall not participate in any
competition judging decisions.




Decisions involving significant disagreement or controversy shall
be appealed by the Kan-sa to the Chief Judge who shall, in turn,
request a Jury Decision. The Jury Decision shall be final and
irrevocable.




                          Article 4
                     Judging Operation
                             46
The Shu-shin shall control the operation of the competition in
accordance with the Competition Rules through the use of the
appropriate Terms and Signals. (See Appendix VIII)

The Shu-shin shall also be responsible for monitoring the physical
condition of the competition area.




The Fuku-shin shall remain stationary in their assigned position on
the Court. The rendering ofthe Fuku-shin's opinion as well as any
replies to the Shu-shin shall be made through the use of a whistle
and flags in accordance with the corresponding official Signals.
(See Appendix IX)




In the following cases, the Shu-shin must call a Court Judges
Meeting in order to render judgments:

A.      Chui and Han-soku Decision; (other than two Kei-koku
        automatically becomes Chui)

B.       Doctor's Stop confirmed by the Medical Judge's decision,
         i.e., involving competitor's injury or illness;

C.       Shu-shin's self-admitted error in the operation of the
         competition resulting in the violation of the Competition
         Rules or when one or more Fuku-shin's appeal to the Shu-
         shin;

D.       When the Shu-shin is notified by the Kan-sa to call a Court
         Judges' Meeting.
The Court Judges Meeting must be held around the seating area of
the Kan-sa. The Kan-sa replies to Judges' questions concerning
Rules of Competition.

Court Judges Meetings shall not be held for point decisions unless
the matter concerns controversy over the Competition Rule(s).



The Shu-shin is authorized to break (interrupt) a competition match
only in the following cases:

A.      When the Shu-shin decides to issue lppon or Waza-ari or
        when two or more Fuku-shin signals a point;



C.      When one or both competitors execute techniques and a
        point is not re-cognized and either one or both competitors
        stop continuation of techniques, or if a scuffle occurs;

D.      When one competitor's technique is executed and then
        followed by one counter attack each, but none of the three
        techniques is recognized as a point;




F.      When competitors make body contact with each other, or
        either side's hands touch opponent's body other than arms
        or legs, causing body movement continuation to stop and
        no further execution oftechnique(s) occurs;

G.      When one or both competitors fall and there is no
        continuation oftechnique(s) or the execution of
        technique(s) continues but is not recognized as a point;

H.      When one or both competitors push against the opponent
        forcefully or collide;
L    When the match develops into a deadlock which lasts for
     10 seconds without the exchange of effective techniques;

1.   When a competitor(s) garments become disheveled,
     impairing or impeding free movement;

K.   When a competitor is recognized by the Shu-shin as being
     in violation of the Competition Rules, or when one or more
     Fuku-shin signals a violation of the Competition Rules;

L.   When the competitor(s) becomes overly-excited,
     emotionally unstable or the atmosphere becomes volatile
     leading possibly to a violation of the Competition Rules;



N.   When the operation of the competition is subject to any
     external disruption, disturbance or interference making the
     continuation of the competition difficult or impractical;

O.   When there is a violation of the Competition Rules
     regarding the operation of the competition;

P.   When notice is received from the Kan-sa to stop the
     competition;




A.   During match time, the Shu-shin shall recognize a point,
     either Ippon or Waza-ari accordingly. The match shall then
     be stopped whereupon the competitors and the Shu-shin
     shall return to their original positions.

     The Shu-shin shall then point with an open hand toward the
     competitor to be awarded either Ippon or Waza-ari. If the
     indication is Ippon, the Shu-shin shall point toward the
     scoring competitor's face. If the indication is Waza-ari, the
     Shu-shin shall point toward the scoring competitor's waist.
     The Shu-shin shall do this so as to obtain the Fuku-shin
                         49
     confirmation of the point to be recognized. The Fuku-shin
     must then show their own intentions. If with the Shu-shin
     voting, a majority vote is obtained, then the point shall be
     declared. If, on the other hand, there is a majority against
     the point indicated or there is a tie, then the point shall
     either be canceled or changed in accordance with the
     wishes of the majority.

B.   During match time, in the case where the Shu-shin fails to
     see an executed technique and consequently does not
     indicate a point other than Teki-kaku, if two or more Fuku-
     shin indicates a point, then the Shu-shin must stop the
     match and obtain point indication confirmation from each
     Fuku-shin. This is done by the Shu-shin pointing and index
     finger at each Fuku-shin. If the point is confirmed by the
     majority, then the Shu-shin must award the point. If there
     is insufficient confirmation, then the Shu-shin shall cancel
     the point declaring Tora-nai (Void).

c.   If Fuku-shin is unable to see target, then he cannot indicate
     a scoring point. However, if the Fuku-shin recognizes
     correct technique, position, and timing as sufficient for a
     point, then Fuku-shin is able to indicate Teki-kaku by
     signaling simultaneously: a sharp whistle; the indicating
     flag movement same as Ippon or Waza-ari; other flag is
     parallel to floor, covering eyes.

     This indication of Teki-kaku may be calculated as a point if
     the Shu-shin confirms that the technique was executed to
     the target. However, if the Shu-shin finds that the
     technique was not executed properly to the target (for
     instance block, cover, bad angle, etc.) then the Shu-shin is
     able to disregard any number of Teki-kaku indications by
     the Fuku-shin.

D.   In the case of a difficult judgment, the Shu-shin may defer
     to each Fuku-shin requesting their opinion and rationale
     prior to declaring the judgment. The procedure for doing
     this shall be for the Shu-shin to stand at the original
     position and then blow one short, sharp whistle. The Shu-
     shin shall then point with an index finger at the Fuku-shin
     needed to form a judgment decision.

     The Fuku-shin so selected shall then indicate their rationale
     and judgment to the Shu-shin.

E.   If following the majority judgment of the Fuku-shin, the
     Shu-shin is in disagreement, and then the Shu-shin may
     request a "Sai-shinpan" (Re-judgment) from the Fuku-shin.

     The procedure for doing this shall be for the Shu-shin to
     step outside the court and then request a Sai-shinpan. The
     signal for Sai-shinpan shall be several short, sharp whistles
     followed by the Shu-shin touching the left chest area with
     the right palm. The Shu-shin shall then indicate an
     explanation followed by the judgment. The Shu-shin shall
     then make the final signal gesture for a Sai-shinpan by
     blowing one long whistle followed by a single, short
     whistle. At that moment, all Fuku-shin must
     simultaneously indicate their respective re-judgments. The
     Sai-shinpan decision shall be final.




A.   The Shu-shin shall indicate Jo-gai by pointing an index
     finger at the competitor and then gesturing with the same
     index finger at the Court boundary line where the
     competitor was Jo-gai while saying "Jo-gai". These signals
     shall serve as the Shu-shin's notice to the Fuku-shin for
     confirmation of the Jo-gai Penalty judgment. The Fuku-
     shin must indicate accordingly their respective judgment.
     If there is a majority confirming the Jo-gai Penalty
     judgment, the Shu-shin shall then use the same index finger,
     this time pointed upward and held at chest-high level while
      saying "Ikkai" to give notice ofthe competitor's first Jo-gai
     Penalty judgment. If the same competitor is subsequently
     Jo-gai, the procedure to be followed shall be the same
      except that the last signal gesture shall be the index and
     middle fmgers pointed upward, at chest-high level while
      saying "Nikai" to give notice ofthe competitor's second Jo-
      gai Penalty judgment. During an individual match, the
                          51
     Shu-shin shall then declare Waza-ari on behalf of the
     competitor's opponent.

B.   The confirmation and Sai-shinpan of Jo-gai penalty
     procedures shall be the same as those for "Procedures for
     Point Decisions" (See Article 4-5-E).




A.   The Shu-shin shall indicate the Ten-to Penalty when the
     competitor falls. The procedure for doing this shall be the
     Shu-shin first pointing with an index finger at the Ten-to
     competitor; second, making one large complete circular
     motion with the same index finger and saying "Ten-to" and
     then third, pointing down toward the center of the court
     with the same index fmger. These signals shall serve as the
     Shu-shin's indication to the Fuku-shin for confirmation of
     the Ten-to Penalty judgment. The Fuku-shin must
     accordingly indicate their respective judgments. If there is
     a majority confirming the Ten-to Penalty judgment, the
     Shu-shin shall give notice of the judgment by using the
     same index finger to motion the penalized Ten-to
     competitor straight back to the center of the boundary line
     with the vocal command of "Sagaru" (move back). Then
     Shu-shin instructs non-penalized competitor to move
     forward to face the penalized competitor and both extend
     arms, touching tips of fmgers together. Shu-shin indicates
     "Tsuzukete, Hajime" which begins penalty match [see
     Article 1-7-B-(1), (2)].




     (1)    The confirmation and Sai-shin-pan of the Ten-to
            penalty procedures shall be the same as those for
            "Procedures for Point Decisions" (see Article 4-5-E).

     (2)    If competitor falls at the same time match is over,
            Shu-shin gives opponent one point (1.0) after
            confirming Ten-to penalty with Fuku-shin.

B.   During Ten-to penalty match:
                         52
     (1)     Ten-to penalty match continues until match is
             interrupted.

     (2)     If competitor(s) does not move within five seconds
             after match begins, Shu-shin stops match and Ten-
             to penalty match is completed.

             At the start of the penalty match (Hajime) the Kan-
             sa shall signal the timekeeper to begin a 5 second
             count. At the end of the count the timekeeper
             sounds a bell or gong.

     (3)     For all declarations of points, notice of penalties,
             or any indication of penalty match, Shu-shin orders
             both competitors to return to original positions in
             center of court. [See Article 1-7-B-(3).]



A.   If the Shu-shin fmds that a very light or minor violation has
     occurred or the potential for violation, then the Shu-shin
     shall have the right to issue and informal warning. In this
     case, Shu-shin must call both competitors, then give
     Informal Warning to faulty party(s), but issues no penalty.

B.   If the Shu-shin fmds a light violation or that the same
     competitor who had previously received the Informal
     Warning again commits the same violation, then the Shu-
     shin shall have the authority to give notice of Kei-koku.
     The Shu-shin's signal for Kei-koku shall be a raised index
     fmger toward violation side. The reason shall be given by
     the Shu-shin by the appropriate Signals.

     The Shu-shin shall demonstrate the intention of giving Kei-
     koku to the Fuku-shin by showing a raised index finger to
     confirm each Fuku-shin, and then give sanction. If two or
     more Fuku-shin are not opposed, then Kei-koku will be
     issued. The issuance of two Kei-koku violations during the
     same match by the same competitor shall automatically
        result in a Chui. In this case, a Court Judges Meeting shall
        not be required.

C.      If the Shu-shin finds a violation or if one or more Fuku-
        shin signals a violation, the Shu-shin must then
        immediately stop the match and from the original position,
        call a Court Judges Meeting to render a judgment on the
        violation.

D.      In the case of a contact violation, the Shu-shin shall first
        call for an examination by the Medical Judge with the
        Tournament Doctor who shall then, based on a Medical
        Decision identify the degree of contact, loss of functional
        capacity - functional impairment. A Court Judges'
        Meeting shall then be held to render a judgment on the
        violation based on the Medical Decision and the Court
        Judges assessment of circumstances based on rules Article
        I-9-D.

E.      If the Court Judges decide that a violation has been
        committed, then the Shu-shin shall, from the original
        position, give notice of the type of violation. In the case of
        a contact violation, the Shu-shin shall indicate the violation
        with the proper hand signal and then issue the penalty.




If the Shu-shin determines that a competitor has sustained an injury
or sickness, or if the Medical Judge signals such through Kan-sa, or
if one or more Fuku-shin signals that such may have occurred, then
the Shu-shin must immediately stop the match and call for the
Medical Judge and Tournament Director. The Shu-shin shall
request a Medical Decision only given by Medical Judge
whereupon a Court Judges Meeting shall be conducted. If the
Medical Decision is a Doctor's Stop then the Shu-shin shall report
this at the Court Judges Meeting. After related matters have been
discussed, then the Court Judges decision shall be announced
through the Court Announcer and the competitor receiving the
Doctor's Stop shall be removed from the competition area.
When an injury or sickness occurs and the Shu-shin stops the match,
it shall not be necessary for the competitors to return to the original
position since the ease and comfort of the sick or injured competitor
must take precedence.

If the Medical Decision made by Medical Judge so orders, the sick
or injured competitor must be moved immediately for medical
treatment even prior to the Court Judges Meeting and decision.

At the signal from the Kan-sa, the timekeeper begins to count at the
start of the treatment of injured competitor. After 5 minutes, the
timekeeper shall sound a bell or gong. At this time the Medical
Judge indicates "Doctor's Stop". The Medical Judge and/or the
treatment doctor have the right to extend this time under special
conditions.




A.       In the case when the Kan-sa wishes to intervene during a
         match, notice shall be given by the holding of a red flag
         overhead and simultaneously blowing several sharp
         whistles. These actions by the Kan-sa shall constitute an
         order to stop the match and for the Shu-shin to approach
         the Kan-sa's seat.

B.       If the Kan-sa believes that an irregularity or questionable
         issue has arisen during the operation of the match, a Court
         Judges Meeting shall be requested through the Shu-shin.
         Upon hearing the Court Judges' explanations, the Kan-sa
         shall then give the appropriate direction to the pertinent
         Court Judge(s). If the matter does not have an immediate
         solution, then the Kan-sa shall ask for a Jury Decision
         through the Chief Judge. Upon hearing the outcome of the
         Jury Decision, the Kan-sa shall then give the appropriate
         direction to the pertinent Court Judge(s) in accordance with
         the Jury Decision.
      The Kan-sa shall notify the Shu-shin when wishing to make a
      change of Court Judge(s). Changes may occur in the following
      cases:




      C.      When the Kan-sa requests a change subject to the approval
              of the Chief Judge;

      D.      When the Medical Judge notifies Kan-sa ofa Judge's
              physical debilitation.



      Since Hiki-wake does not apply in Kettei-sen, the Shu-shin shall
      call for a Court Judges' Meeting in order to make the decision. At
      this meeting, the Court Judges must make a decision for either Aka
      or Shiro.

      Following the meeting, each Court Judge shall return to the original
      position. At the Shu-shin's Han-tei (Judgment), the Court Judges
      signals must all be consistent with the majority decision of the
      Court Judges' Meeting.

13.   Procedure for awarding points or issuing penalty by Shu-shin is as
      follows:



              1)    Indicate scoring competitor
              2)    Explanation of scoring technique; what technique and
                    what target
              3)    Award point; Ippon or Waza-ari



              1)     Indicate Jo-gai competitor
              2)     Issue second Jo-gai
             3)     Indicate opponent of Jo-gai competitor and award
                    Waza-ari



             1)     Indicate penalized competitor
             2)     Issue penalty
             3)     Indicate non-penalized competitor and declare
                    winner



             1)     Indicate penalized competitor
             2)     Explanation for penalty
             3)     Issue penalty



                             Article 5
               Supplement to Judging Operation Rules


1.   When a Fuku-shin signals (by flags or whistle) indicating that an
     effective technique has been delivered by one of the competitors,
     the Shu-shin may ignore the signal and continue with the match.
     However, when two or more Judges have signaled likewise, the
     Shu-shin must suspend the match. The Shu-shin shall then listen to
     their opinions and then render a decision on the match.

     However, in the case of an emergency, a violation or a Jo-gai
     signaled by even one Fuku-shin, then the Shu-shin is required to
     stop the match.

2.   Only the Shu-shin shall have the authority to suspend or terminate
     the match. No one other than the Shu-shin shall be permitted to halt
     the match arbitrarily. An attack, even if effective, delivered after an
     order to stop has been given, shall not be recognized nor shall it
     constitute a basis for decision.
3.   The authority of the respective Court's Kan-san of the match shall
     include supervision, inspection, and direction of the Timer and the
     Recorder.

     Records kept at the match shall become the official record subject to
     the approval of the respective Court's Kan-sa.

4.   The Shu-shin and the Fuku-shin shall bear in mind the following
     points during the match time:

     A.      The Shu-shin and the Judges must conduct themselves
             impartially and fairly.

     B.      They must comport themselves with dignity and self-
             control.

     C.      They must concentrate their full attention on the match so
             as to judge every action of the competitors correctly.

     D.      They must not converse with anyone during the match.
             The Kan-sa and Fuku-shin may speak only through the
             Shu-shin. The Fuku-shin may not converse with one
             another.

5.   Other than Jo-gai and Ten-to penalties, the following procedures
     apply to penalties.



             1st time                  Informal warning
             2nd time                  Kei-koku
             3rd time                  2nd Kei-koku then Chui
             4th time                  2nd Chui then Han-soku
                                       Requires Court Judge's decision

     B.      Ignoring Shu-shin's directions (Chui-mushi) using
             techniques without control and using potentially dangerous
             techniques. (Mo-da, Kin-shi)

             1st time                  Informal warning
             2nd time                  Kei-koku
                              Penalty decided by Court Judges
                              Meeting

C.   Fu-kei (Bad Attitude), Poor Etiquette, or Disruptive Self-
     Promotion.

     1st time                  Informal warning
     2nd time                  Penalty decided by Court Judges
                               Meeting

D.   Other than A, B, C as above, without informal warning or
     Kei-koku the penalty is decided by Court Judges Meeting.
                         Article 1
                         General




Kata Competition demonstrates Traditional Karate Kata through
individual and team presentations. The Synchronized Team
category demonstrates both Kata and its application. Order of
winners is determined by point scoring; the higher the score, the
higher the winner's placement.




a)   Men's Individual
b)   Women's Individual
c)   Men's Team (3 persons)
d)   Women's Team (3 persons)




The competition area shall be eight square meters. The competitor
shall perform the Kata facing the main seating area in one of two
positions, which are located 2 meters in front of and in back of the
exact center of the competition area. The surface of the floor must
be flat and neither too smooth as to be slippery nor too rough as to
inhibit proper execution. The conditions shall be the same as those
set forth under the Kumite Rules. The positions of the Judges and
Court Clerks shall be those set forth by Appendix II.




Competitors shall be required to select Katas only from the
following, although exceptions will be allowed in the case of
different style Katas having the same origins but whose name
pronunciations are different.
(2)    Bassai (Pasai) Dai, Sho
       -includes Itosu, Matsumura, Yabu, etc.

(3)    Chin-tei (Chinte)

(4)    En-pi (Wan-Shu)

(5)    Gan-Kaku (Chin-To)

(6)    Gojyu-Shi-Ho   (U-Sei-Shi), Dai, Sho

(7)    Han-Getsu (Sei-San)

(8)    Ji-In

(9)    Ji-On

(10)   Jitte

(11)   Kan-Ku (Ku-Chan-Ku), Dai, Sho
       -includes Shi-Ho-Ku-Chan-Ku
At elimination time, the scoring shall be determined on the basis of
the viewpoint of Judges according to the formula of Basic Points
minus Penalty Points.

At final match time (except Synchronized Kata Application), the
scoring formula shall be Basic Points plus Skill Points minus
Penalty Points.

Final matches of Synchronized Kata competition: Scoring is derived
from scores ofKata (3-person) and Application of the same Kata.




        (1)      Body Dynamics
        (2)      Power
        (3)      Form
        (4)      Transition




                 Degree or rate of power generated by the body
                 dynamics and muscle action with proper breathing,
                 defined as:
        III. KAT A RULES

      (a)     Smooth body movement (timing)
              throughout entire execution of technique
              beginning from floor and ending at
              contact point.
      (b)     Degree of increasing energy through
              speed combined with smoothness of
              technique.

(2)   Power

      (a)     Efficiency and focus of power with
              respect to the objective of the technique,
              including:

              At final stage of technique, produce
              maximum energy through maximum
              energy/pressure directed to floor;

              Degree of transmission of total energy to
              target (what percentage). Total is based
              on combination of body movement and
              pressure to floor;

              Degree of total body contraction focused
              on target.

      (b)     Degree of power and speed control
              appropriately matching the objective of
              the technique;

      (c)     Degree of strength of will ("Spirit") or
              mental power focused on target.

(3)   Form

      (a)     Degree of proper matching intended
              purpose of technique;

      (b)     Degree of balance (stance, posture, and
              coherence);


                 64
(c)     Degree of emotional stability and mental
        concentration.



(a)     Quality of skill performance in body
        shifting;

(b)     Quality of continuity from technique to
        technique;

(c)     Appropriate tempo to match the technique
        objective.




(a)     Degree of techniques' quality based on
        depth of training experience.
(b)     Degree of body movement combined with
        skill of technique.



This refers to the level of impression the
demonstrator makes on the observer as a result of
both the demonstrator's understanding of
application and display of high level of technical
skill with grace and strong spirit.
(1)   Kata Level- Scoring uses same criteria as
      individual Kata final match.

(2)   Application of Techniques - Degree of proper
      delivery and quality of technique.

(3)   Timing and Ma-ai - Degree of correct timing and
      proper distance during delivery of techniques.

(4)   Choreography - Degree of realism and artistic
      delivery.




      Note: If ending position is less than 5 em, or less
      than 5 degrees from original position, then no
      penalty.



(5)   Loss of synchronization (applies only to
      Synchronized Kata);

(6)   Error of application (applies only to Synchronized
      Kata Application);

(7)   Unrealistic technique (applies only to
      Synchronized Kata Application).
                 Very   Bad    Poor    Below   Avg.    <\bove    Good      Very     xcellent
                 Bad                   Avg.            Avg.                Good
BODY              1.2    1.3    1.4     1.5     1.6      1.7      1.8       1.9      2.0
)YNAMICS
OWER              1.2    1.3   1.4      1.5     1.6     1.7       1.8       1.9      2.0
ORM               1.2    1.3    1.4     1.5     1.6     1.7       1.8       1.9      2.0
RANSITION         1.2    1.3    1.4     1.5    1.6      1.7       1.8       1.9      2.0
OTAL             ~5.1   5.2    5.6     6.0     6.4       6.8     7.2        7.6        8
                        -5.5   -5.9    -6.3    -6.7     -7.1     -7.5       -7.9




                 Very   Bad    Poor    Below   Avg.    f\bove    Good       Very   Excellent
                 Bad                   Avg.             Avg.                Good
MASTERY           1.0    1.1    1.2     1.3     1.5       1.6     1.8        1.9       2.0
MPRESSION                               1.4               1.7




                 Very   Bad    Poor    ~elow   Avg.    I-\bove   Good      Very    Excellent
                 Bad                    Avg.            Avg.               Good
~TALEVEL          1.0   1.1-    1.3-    1.5-    1.7-     1.9-     2.1-      2.3-       2.5
                        1.2     1.4      1.6    1.8       2.0     2.2       2.4
f\PPLICA nON      1.0   1.1-    1.3-    1.5-    1.7-     1.9-    2.1-       2.3-       2.5
)F                      1.2     1.4     1.6     1.8       2.0    2.2        2.4
 ECHNIQUES
IMING&            1.0   1.1-    1.3-    1.5-    1.7-    1.9-      2.1-      2.3-       2.5
MA-AI                   1.2     1.4     1.6     1.8     2.0       2.2       2.4
 HOREO-           1.0   1.1-    1.3-    1.5-    1.7-    1.9-      2.1-      2.3-       2.5
JRAPHY                  1.2     1.4     1.6     1.8     2.0       2.2       2.4
 OTAL            ~4.3   4.4-   5.2-     6.0-   6.8-     7.6-      8.4-      9.2-      10.0
                        5.1    5.9      6.7    7.5      8.3       9.1       9.9




       TYPE                      GRADING SCALE                           DEDUCTIONS

 I. Hesitation          A. Bewilderment / Confusion                     0.1 each instance

                        8. Stopping about I second                      0.1 each instance

 2. Loss of Balance     A. Imbalance while in place                     0.1 each instance

                        8. Moving                                       0.3 each instance
                     c. Falling

                        (1) breaking fall with hand(s),    0.5 each instance
                            arm(s), knee(s) or leg(s)

                       (2) touching floor with             1.0
                           anything other than arms
                           and legs (complete fall)

3. Deviation of      A. Position (beginning and            0.1 per quarter step
   Position             ending deviations)

                     B. Facing wrong direction at final    0.2 per 30°
                        position

4. Etiquette         A. Forget to bow to Shu-shin          0.2 per bow
                        (Referee) or competitor

                     B. Negative attitude

                        (1) Poor                           0.3

                        (2) Bad                            0.5

5. Loss of           A. Simultaneousness slightly off
   Synchronization      (less than a half action)
   (Synchronized
    KataOnly)           (1) 1-4 occurrence(s)              0.1 each instance

                        (2) over 5 occurrences             0.5

                     B. Simultaneousness off
                        (more than a half action
                         but less than a full action)

                        (I) 1-2 occurrence(s)              0.3 each instance

                        (2) over 3 occurrences             0.7

                     C. Simultaneousness extremely off     1.0

6. Error of          A. Offense Side
   Application
   (Synchronized        (I) fewer or more attack           0.3 per mistake
    KataOnly)               techniques used than allowed

                        (2) no 2 persons attack            0.5
                         (3) use of any other martial art   0.3 each instance
                             technique by offense

                   B. Defense Side

                         (I) First technique is different   0.3 per mistake
                             From original Kata technique

                         (2) Some parts of demonstrated     0.3 per mistake
                             Kata are different from the
                             original Kata

7. Unrealistic      A. Competitor attempts unrealistic      0.2 each instance
   Technique           technique
   (Synchronized
    KataOnly)


             Remarks:
                        (a)       In Synchronized Kata, if competitor(s)
                                  demonstrated a similar but different form
                                  or action, or executes a technique at a
                                  slightly different angle (not more than 45
                                  degrees) than other competitor(s), then
                                  penalty 5-B applies.

                                  In Synchronized Kata, if competitor(s)
                                  demonstrated a completely different form
                                  or action, or executes a technique at a
                                  completely different angle (more than 45
                                  degrees) than other competitor(s), then
                                  penalty 5-C applies.




             The Judges must meet at least twenty-four hours prior to
             the tournament in order to ensure scoring uniformity and
             consistency through review of at least three model matches.
             If Judges are unable to meet prior to the tournament, they
             may ensure scoring uniformity by together reviewing
             scores of first match of the competition (before assigning
             final score).
A Han-soku shall be declared against a competitor in the following
cases. The Shu-shin's (Referee's) indication ofa Han-soku shall be
the holding of a zero card overhead.

A.   When the Kata performed differs from the Kata registered by
     the competitor;

B.   In case of mixing up techniques during Synchronized Kata
     Application using different techniques in application that
     differs from original Kata techniques;

C.   When there is a delay or lapse of movement of five seconds or
     longer during the performance of the Kata;

D.   When the competitor speaks during the performance of the
     Kata;

E.   When the competitor receives prompting or coaching from
     anyone in the competition area during the performance of the
     Kata;

F.   When during the Synchronized Kata performance, the
     competitors count or use sounds to keep cadence (except
     beginning, ending announcements or "Kiai");

G.   When during the performance of the Kata, the competitor's
     garments are removed or become disheveled so as to inhibit
     free movement or to distract attention;

H.   When the competitor intentionally ignores the Shu-shin's
     instructions;

I.   When the competitor's conduct or demeanor is unruly,
     impolite, or generally not consistent with the normally
     accepted behavior expected in the competition area;



K.   When the competitor seriously violates any of the
     Competition Rules.
Remark:
          The term, competitor, shall also refer to the members of a
          Synchronized Kata team.



A violation committed by any single team member shall result in a
penalty or Han-soku against the entire team. If any singly team
member receives a Doctor's Stop, this ruling shall also apply to the
entire team.



The demonstration shall be immediately stopped (Doctor's Stop)
whenever there is a Medical Decision that a danger of injury or
illness exists to the competitor. In the case of Doctor's Stop, no
scoring shall take place.



A.   The Coach shall have the right to protest any matter related to
     the operation of the Competition Rules. However, the Coach
     may not protest any scoring decision of the Court Judge(s).

B.    The Coach's protest must be made before the Court Judges
      leave the respective Competition Area.

C.    The Coach's protest may only be lodged with the Chief Judge
      and not with the Court Judge(s).

D.    When the Chief Judge receives a protest from the Coach and
      after confirming that the protest concerns an alleged violation
      of the Competition Rules, the Chief Judge shall order Shu-
      shin to call a Court Judge's Meeting. Ifthe Court Judges
      determine that a violation has occurred, then ifuncorrectable,
      the results are voided.
(1)        There shall be a maximum of twelve competitors per
           elimination pool. The top four competitors (teams)
           having the highest scores shall be selected from each
           pool for the next elimination round. This system of
           eliminations shall continue with each ascending pool
           until only the top eight competitors (teams) remain.

           The numbers for the first round elimination pools are
           as follows: 2,4,6,8, 12, 16,24 or 32.

(2)        The top eight competitors (team) as determined by (1)
           above shall compete to determine the top four
           competitors (teams) by final eliminations.

(3)        The top four competitors (teams) shall compete in the
           final matches.

Remarks:
(1)    See Appendix VI for Elimination Chart

(2)        The individual competitor (team) having the lowest
           score shall compete first in the next eliminations re-
           pool round. In the case where the scores of the
           competitor (team) are the same, the pool group with
           the lower designation number shall compete first.
           When the competitors (teams) are from the same pool
           group and have identical scores, the competitor
           (team) who competed earliest shall compete first.



      Placement must be done by random drawing and not by
      human design or control. However, the competitors
      (teams) from the same country or from the same continent
      must be seeded. In addition, the winners (places 1 to 4) of
      the last tournament bearing the same title shall be seeded.
      It is possible to seed competitors from the separate pools.
      Seeded competitors in each pool should be last to
      demonstrate.
A.   The Tournament Organizing Committee must select the
     following Court Clerks:

             Scheduler                         one person
             Announcer                         one person
             Recorder                          two persons
             Court Worker                      one person
             Messenger                         one person

B.   The Court Clerks shall perform their duties under the
     direction of the respective Court Shu-shin.



                     Article 2
                    Competition




A.   All competitors are required to use Karate uniform (Karate-
     Gi) as set forth by the Competition Rules (See Appendix
     XXI). Eyeglasses are permitted. Supportive bandaging
     such as neoprene, elastic or multiple layers of tape is
     prohibited. Only a double wrap of tape is permitted.




     (2)     Weapons or related equipment. Exception
             approved by the Technical Committee at time of
             application of Synchronized Kata.



     (4)     Heavy bandaging exceeding minimum
             requirements.
A.   The competitor (team) shall select a Kata from among the
     Kata types outlined in Article 1-3.
B.   The competitor (team) can retain or change the Kata at each
     elimination round, except for the final elimination round
     and finals whereupon a completely different Kata must be
     performed.
C.   Competitor (team) must register name of the Kata to
     respective Recorder prior to demonstration.



A.   The scores from the elimination rounds shall not be
     cumulative.

B.   Final eliminations shall be conducted when there is only
     one pool remaining. The top four individual or team
     competitors having the highest scores shall compete in the
     fmal round in the same competition area.

C.   Finals must be conducted from one pool and in the same
     competition area. The final score shall be the sum total of
     the final elimination and finals scores.

      In the case of Synchronized Kata, the final score shall be
      the sum total of the fmal elimination and finals scores (Kata
      and Application).



A.   If during any point of the eliminations or final match, there
     are individual competitors or teams having identical or tie
     scores, add up all six original scores to determine winner. If
     a tie score still remains, then winner will be decided by
     Kettei-sen.

B.   In final match of Synchronized Kata, score is determined by
     total of Kata and Application. In case of a tie score, team
     with higher Application score is the winner. If Application
     scores are still tied, then winning score is determined by sum
     of original six scores of Application.   Then, if tied, Kettei-
     sen.

C.   At Kettei-sen time, the Kata selected by the competitor must
     be different from that which resulted in a tie score. In case
     of a draw in Synchronized Kata [mals, then teams must
     again demonstrate only Application.

D.   The scores of the Kettei-sen shall not be used for computing
     the final scores. The Kettei-sen scores shall instead be used
     solely for determining the order of placement (breaking the
     tie). Only the original scores shall be used for computing
     the final score for each competitor (team).




      (I)      The competitor shall select either position marked
               as previously indicated in front of the main seating
               area. The name of the Kata shall then be
               announced and the demonstration shall commence.

      (2)      The competitor shall bear complete responsibility
               for any consequences caused by inadvertently
               stepping out of the Competition Area and thereby
               running into any impediments to movement.




                The competitors shall select any position inside the
                Competition Area.

                Each competitor must mark own starting position
                with tape supplied by officials.
                During Kata Application demonstration,
                competitors must use one of the same starting
                positions as original Kata.

        (2)     The competitors shall bear compete responsibility
                for any consequences caused by inadvertently
                stepping out of the Competition Area and thereby
                running into any impediments to movement. The
                entire team shall be at fault.




The members of each Synchronized Kata team must remain the
same throughout the elimination. Members may not be added or
dropped from a team. However, the demonstration positions are
permitted to change.




The operation of the competition shall be in accordance with the
following order.




        (1)      Competitor in position, bow to the Shu-shin and
                 announce the name of the Kata to be demonstrated.
                 The Court Announcer announces the name of
                 registered Kata. If there is a difference between
                 the Kata announced by Court Announcer and the
                 Kata announced by competitor then Shu-shin must
                 confirm.

                 In the case of a Synchronized Kata, the team shall
                 take a position in any part of the Competition Area.
                 The team shall then bow to the Shu-shin and each
                 competitor shall place tape (approximately 5 cm x
                 20 cm) on floor for respective position and, from
                 formal stance, the team captain shall announce the
                 name of the Kata to be demonstrated.
(2)   In case of final match of Synchronized Kata, Team
      must demonstrate Application of Kata just
      completed. This is designated by Shu-shin calling
      "Bun-kai" (Application commences).

      Application - Involves three demonstrators with
      one demonstrator applying techniques of same
      Kata as the final round Kata. Two demonstrators
      take up attack positions.

      Composition (choreography) must be planned by
      respective team members according to following
      requirements:

      Offense:
          Make 4 attacks upon the Kata demonstrator,
          three single person attacks and one 2-person
          attack.

          The 2-person attack must be a simultaneous
          (same time) or "one-two" consecutive attack
          (the attack by the second person must begin
          before the attack by the first person is
          completed).

          The Kata demonstrator may engage each
          attacker only twice (two times). Example: In a
          simultaneous attack the Kata demonstrator
          utilizes an exact technique from the Kata to
          block both attackers initial action. This counts
          as one engagement with each attacker. The
          very next time the Kata demonstrator engages
          each of the opponents they must be dispatched.

          With the single person attack, the Kata
          demonstrator can only engage with the
          attacker twice. The engagement must be
          continuous demonstrating proper Zan-shin.
        (a)    Offense may use Bo (stick) 140 cm
               or shorter with diameter of 3 cm (±5
               cm).

        (b)    Offense cannot use any techniques,
               which are distinct forms of any other
               martial art.




    The demonstrator must use the exact Kata
    technique against an attack with no change
    allowed.

    Remarks:
       (a) For example, after the first technique,
             if a block is used, then the
             demonstrator can use any additional
             counter technique.

        (b)    If a technique in the Kata is
               performed in slow motion, it can be
               performed at full speed in
               application demonstration.

        (c)    In case of a defense against two
               attackers, the first defense
               movement must be a technique from
               the Kata, but the second attacker can
               be met with any counter technique.

        (d)        When the demonstrator completes
                   an application against an attacker,
                   then the next action must be
                   resumed from the Kata.

        (e)        The demonstrator must return to the
                   original starting position.

Sequence of Application is as follows:
              78
       (c)     Only the offense side can place
               themselves anywhere in the Competition
               Area and either stand or kneel to Sei-za
               (formal floor-sitting position).

       (d)     Demonstrator begins the Kata. Offense,
               according to their prearranged
               choreography, executes the attack(s). If
               there is a time lag before the next attack,
               the offense side is required to either stand
               or to resume Sei-za position until time of
               next attack.

       (e)     Kata demonstration completed. Team
               members bow to each other, face Shu-shin,
               and bow.

(3)   After the competitor (team) has demonstrated the
      Kata and has bowed to the Shu-shin, they shall exit
      the competition area as ordered by the Shu-shin. In
      Synchronized Kata competition, each team member
      shall remove his or her floor position tape before
      exiting the competition area.

(4)   If a Shu-shin discovers a penalty or two or more
      Fuku-shin (Corner Judge) indicate penalty after the
      demonstration of a Kata, then Shu-shin shall call a
      Court Judges Meeting.

      Court Judges indicate penalty by holding red flag by
      left side then raising flag upright at knee.

      If Shu-shin finds no penalty or if two or more
      Judges do not indicate any penalty, the Shu-shin
      indicates no penalty. No penalty is indicated by
      holding white flag at right knee, then raising flag
      upright at knee.

      After penalty point decision, the Court Judges shall
      complete their Scoring Form (See Appendix XII,
      XIII). The Shu-shin shall then request their
      presentation of the scores by blowing one long
      whistle followed by one short, sharp whistle. The
      Court Judges shall each present their scores by
      holding their own Scoring Boards overhead.

(5)   The Recorder shall collect the Scoring Forms from
      each Court Judge. In case of Synchronized Kata
      final match, Recorder does not collect Scoring
      Forms.

(6)   The Announcer shall read each score aloud starting
      with the Shu-shin and proceeding clockwise. If a
      score is misread, Shu-shin shall request a correction
      from the Announcer. To direct the Court Judges to
      lower their Scoring Boards after the Announcer has
      read them correctly, the Shu-shin shall blow one
      short whistle.

      In case of final match of Synchronized Kata, Shu-
      shin first asks for Court Judges to indicate Kata
      score via Scoring Board. Then after Announcer
      reads Scoring Boards, the Shu-shin requests Judges
      to show Application Score.

      After Application Score is read off, then Recorder
      collects Scoring Forms.

(7)   In case of Kettei-sen, after Court Judges have
      completed Scoring Form, then next match begins
      (without showing Scoring Board).

      When all Kettei-sen are finished, then Shu-shin calls
      Court Judges meeting to determined order of
      rank·mg (1st , 2nd , 3rd) .
                          Article 3
                          Judging




All Judges must follow the required dress code set by the Technical
Committee.




Each Court Judge shall sit in assigned seating at the competition
area. The following judging equipment must be present at the
competition area:




        Hard board (25 cm x 40 cm). Left side with flip-over
        numbers from 0 to 9 in black and right side with flip-over
        numbers from 0 to .9 in red.

C.       Official Scoring Form (See Appendix XII Individual and
         Synchronized Kata, Appendix XIII Synchronized Kata
         Application).
1.       The Court Judges shall be made up of one Shu-
         shin (Referee) and five Fuku-shins (Comer Judges).

2.       The Chief Judge shall make all judging
         assignments and position placements at each
         respective competition.

3.       Once assigned, the Court Judges may not change
         from their assigned pools of competitors.
         However, in the case of an injury or sickness that
         prevents the Court Judge(s) from continuing, the
         Chief Judge may make replacement(s). When this
         occurs, all the preceding competition scoring
         records of that particular competitors' pool shall be
         voided and the new competition must begin anew.




The Chief Judge shall monitor the Court Judges judging. If
the Chief Judge finds clearly unfair judging irregularities, a
warning will be issued through the Shu-shin to the
offending Court Judge(s).

If, after the warning, the said judging irregularities persist,
the Chief Judge shall order an end to the competition
through the Shu-shin, subject to the approval of the Jury.
When this occurs, all the preceding competition scoring
records of that particular competitors' pool shall be voided
and the competition must begin anew with a different
composition of Court Judges as determined by the Chief
Judge.




(1)      Each Court Judge is required to score each
         competition. The highest and lowest scores shall
         be disregarded. The competitor (Team) score shall
         be the sum total of the remaining four scores
         divided by four (average score).
        (2)      The penalty points must first be decided by Court
                 Judges Meeting based on Article 1-4-E- (4).

                 The Court Judges shall first write their scores on
                 the official Scoring Forms (Appendix XII
                 Individual and Synchronized Kata, Appendix XIII
                 Application of Synchronized Kata). At this time,
                 check "overview" of point scored, and then adjust
                 according to each element of scoring.

                 Next, upon the Shu-shin signal, the Court Judges
                 shall show their corresponding numbered Scoring
                 Boards. The official Scoring Forms shall then be
                 collected by the Recorder.

                 In case of Kettei-sen, Court Judge must determine,
                 by meeting, the order of winners. After Court
                 Judges finish scoring, they do not display Score
                 Board. The Shu-shin calls a meeting and order of
                 winners is determined by vote.




The Chief Judge is empowered to delegate authority to the Assistant
Chief Judge(s) assigned to a separate court.




                          Article 4
                     Judging Operation




The Shu-shin shall control the operation of the competition in
accordance with the Competition Rules. The Shu-shin shall be
responsible for ensuring that the competition area, the competition,
and the judging are handled under the best conditions.
If deemed necessary to fulfill these purposes, the Shu-shin may
direct the Court Clerks, competitor(s), and Judge(s) toward the
attainment of these optimum conditions.

Furthermore, the Shu-shin must diligently and strictly monitor the
scores announced by the Announcer from the Scoring Boards
displayed by each Court Judge. If a mistake is made, the Shu-shin
shall order a correction and re-announcement of the corrected score.
The Shu-shin's discovery of a mistaken announcement shall be
signaled by several short, sharp whistles followed by the Shu-shin
pointing at the mistakenly announced Scoring Board with a red flag.




When Shu-shin calls meeting, Court Judges assemble in front of the
Shu-shin's chair.

At the Court Judges meeting, each Court Judge including the Shu-
shin, shall have an equal voting right. In the case of tie vote, the
Shu-shin shall make the final decision.




At the Court Judges meeting, the Fuku-shin report penalty points to
Shu-shin who then determined what penalty points apply. The
penalty points cannot be lower or higher than reported by Fuku-shin.




A.      If the Shu-shin finds a serious violation or if one or more
        Fuku-shin signals a violation, the Shu-shin must then
        immediately stop the match and call a Court Judges
        Meeting.

B.       Court Judges Meeting shall make the ruling as to the
         fmding of Han-soku or for determining order of
         competitor's scores after rematch. If the Court Judges
         decision is that Han-soku has been committed, then the
         Shu-shin shall signal by blowing several short, sharp
         whistles while simultaneously holding a red flag straight
         overhead which indicates zero points. The Shu-shin shall
                              84
        then order the competitor (team) out of the competition
        area.




In the case of injury or illness during the competition, the Shu-shin
must do the following:

A.       Upon notice of Doctor's Stop by the Medical Judge, the
         Shu-shin shall immediately stop the competition and
         request medical treatment.

B.       When the Shu-shin discovers symptoms of injury or illness,
         the Shu-shin shall immediately signal for the Medical
         Doctor and Medical Judge by crisscrossing both flags
         above the head. The Shu-shin shall neither use the whistle
         nor stop the competition. If the Medical Judge rules
         Doctor's Stop, then the Shu-shin shall immediately stop the
         competition and request medical treatment.

C.       In the case where one or more Fuku-shin discovers
         symptoms of injury or illness, the Fuku-shin(s) shall appeal
         to the Shu-shin by waving a red flag overhead from side to
         side. Ifthe Medical Judge rules Doctor's Stop then the
         Shu-shin shall immediately stop the competition and
         request medical treatment.

D.       If decision of Medical Judge is not Doctor's Stop, then
         demonstrator must start again from beginning.




                         Article 5
           Supplement to Judging Operation Rules




Following each competition, the Recorder shall collect all Scoring
Forms. The Recorder shall hold the Scoring Forms in order to
verifY that they are in agreement with the Scoring Boards. If a
                              85
discrepancy is found between the Scoring Form and the Scoring
Board, the Recorder shall disregard the Scoring Board score and
adjust the score based on the Scoring Form. The Recorder shall
then notify the Chief Judge.




The Announcer shall read aloud the Scoring Boards beginning with
the Shu-shin and then proceeding clockwise with each Judge. As
each board is read, the corresponding Judge's country shall then be
announced. After all the scoring has been announced, the Recorder
shall then add all the individual scores and give the total to the
Announcer who shall then announce the average score.

In final match of Synchronized Kata, Announcer first announces
Kata score, then Application score, then total score.




After a Kettei-sen is completed, all Court Judges bring in their
scoring forms and discuss the results to determine first the ranking
order. The Shu-shin collects all Scoring Forms, indicate their
decision to the Recorder, and then turn in Scoring Forms.




The scores given to each competitor (team) must be clearly posted
so that they are visible to all persons in the tournament area.

In case of a Kettei-sen, scores are not announced, only the relative
order (1 st, 2nd, 3fd) beginning with the highest score.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                              









                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                    "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                              #                                                                      $                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #                                   




                                                !                                      #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                        !                   &                       #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                    !                   &                       #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                            !                       +                   #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,                           -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    &                                       /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
!   &   #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                1           2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                     "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               %                                                                                                                                          %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                  "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3




                            $                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3




                                                                                                                            )                                                                                                                                                      "                                                                                                                                                                                                   4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "




                                                                                                                                !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                            %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2




                                                    !                                                      #                                                           $                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          !                                                                                                                                                                                                        "                                               #                                                                                                               +                               4                                   /                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7                                                                                                                                                                                              !                           8                       .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       #                                                   




                                                        !                                                          #                                                       $                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                               




                9




                                                                                                     "                                                  3




                                                            !                                                  #                                                               :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                !                                                          #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                    !                                                   #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "                                                                                                                                                                                 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                        5




                                                                    !                                                          #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      "                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                        !                                                           #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




   '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                                        ;       <
                                                            =                                   >                                               ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           @                                                                                                       A                                                                                           B                               C                                                                                                                                   D                                                   E                                                                                           F                                                                                                                                           G                                                                           H                                                       H                                               F                                                                       A                                                                           I                                                   F                                                                                                       I                                                       J                                                           K                                                                               F                                                                                                       >                                                                           L                                                               A                                                                                                                   M                                                                               B                                               L                                                                           >                                                           F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D                                   E                                                                           F                                                                                   N                                                                                                                   I                                                                           F                                                                                   B                                           O                                                                                               F                                                                       I                                                                                                                       L                                                               A                                                                               C                                                                   P                                                                                                   E                                                                       F                                                                                   Q                                                   F                                                                                                                       J                                           A                                                                                                                   D                                                   E                                                                               F                                                                                                                   R                                                                                               G                                                                               N                                                                                                           M                                                                           F                                               D                                               J                                   D                                       J                                   G                                                   A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Q                                                                   F                                                       L                                                                                                                           L                                                                                   A                                                                                   K                                                                                                                                               F                                                               J                                                       D                                       E                                                                               F                                                                   Q                                                                                   I                                                       D                                               L                                                                       A                                                                           K                                                                                                                               G                                                                                   Q                                                                               T                                                                               A                                                                               F                                                                       F                                                                           B                                                                                       D                                           G                                                                                                   U                                                                                   F                                                       J                               V                                                       W                                                       L

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    =                                           H                                               G                                                                                               Q                                               N                                                                                                                               L                                                                                   B                                                                                                           H                                                           B                                   G                                                                               G                                                                               Q                                                   V                                                   I                                                           J                                   D                                       D                                       J                                               A                                                                   X                                                                                                                               M                                                                                   G                                                                                   I                                                       J                                       D                                                       J                                       G                                                                       A                                                                                           ?                                               Y




                                                                    =                               K                                                   ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Z                                                                                                       F                                                                                   N                                                                                                               G                                                                                               A                                                                                   I                                                                                       D                                               Q                                               L                                                               D                                                   G                                                                       Q                                                                                                       [                                                                   F                                                               X                                                                       J                                           A                                                                                   I                                                                                                       D                                                       E                                                                               F                                                                                                               \                                                                                                           L                                                                           D                                               L                                                           Y                                                                                   @                                                                                                       H                                   H                                                           F                                                   A                                                                           I                                                   F                                                   ]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L                                                           >                                                                               >                                                                       G                                                                           Q                                                   K                                                                                                   J                                           A                                                                                               X                                                                                                                                   D                                               G                                                                                                                       D                                       E                                                                   F                                                                   J                                       Q                                                                                   M                                                                                   Q                                                           F                                                           L                                                                           Q                                                           Q                                                   L                                                                   A                                                                               X                                                                           F                                                                               K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    >                                                           E                                                                                           G                                                                   Q                                                               F                                                                   G                                                                                               X                                                                                           Q                                                                   L                                                                       M                                                                       E                                                                               C                                                                           ]                                                                                   F                                                                   ^                                                                       F                                                               >                                                                       _                                                                                       D                               F                                                                           I                                                                                                                       D                                   E                                                                               F                                                                                                               L                                                                           D                               D                                                       L                                                                           >                                           T                                                               =                                                       I                                           ?                                           Y                                                                                                                       `                           H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D                                   E                                                                           F                                                                               Q                                                           F                                                                                                                       J                                           I                                                                                                                       L                                                                                                                               D                                           J                                           N                                                                                                                       F                                                                                                               B                                   L                                                               X                                                                                                       [                                                                                       F                                                                       H                                           G                                                                                       Q                                                       F                                                                                                                           D                                           E                                                                   F                                                                                                                           A                                                                           F                                                                           ^                                                       D                                                                           L                                                       D                                           D                                   L                                                                   >                                                   T                                   ]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D                                   E                                                                               F                                                                                                                       G                                                                           H                                                               H                                                               F                                                                   A                                                                                                       I                                                                   F                                                                                                                       I                                                       J                                           K                                                                           F                                                                                                   J                                   I                                                                                                       Q                                                   F                                                                   a                                                                                   _                                                                                   J                                           Q                                           F                                                                       K                                                                                                                       D                                                       G                                                                                                                       F                                                                       J                                   D                                   E                                                           F                                                           Q                                                                                           I                                                           D                               L                                           A                                   K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G                                                                       Q                                                                                                   D                                   G                                                                                                                       Q                                                               F                                                                               I                                                                                       _                                                                       N                                                                                                                                   F                                                                                                                       U                                                                                   F                                                               J                                   V                                               W                                                               L                                                                                                                       M                                                                       G                                                                                       I                                                               J                                               D                                   J                                               G                                                                           A                                                                                                                                   _                                                                       A                                                                               D                                       J                               B                                                                           D                                               J                           N                                                                                                                   F                                                                                   G                               H




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A                                                                       F                                                                               ^                                                                       D                                                                                           L                                                                           D                                                               D                                           L                                                                                           >                                                                   T                                                                       Y




                                                                            =                               F                                               ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \                                                                                                           L                                                                           D                                               L                                                                                                           K                                                                                                   F                                                                       N                                                                                                                                               G                                                                           A                                                                           I                                                               D                                       Q                                                   L                                                               D                                   J                                   G                                                                           A                                                                                                                                           >                                                                   G                                                                                       N                                                                                                                       M                                                                               B                                                   F                                                               D                                                       F                                                       K                                                                                       Y                                                                                                               b                                                                                   F                                               L                                                                   N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N                                                                                                                   F                                                                           N                                                                                                                           [                                                                                   F                                                                                   Q                                                                           I                                                                                                                       [                                                                       G                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                       D                                       G                                                                                                                   F                                                                   L                                                                       >                                                                       E                                                                                                                               G                                                                               D                                       E                                                                               F                                                                   Q                                                       ]                                                                                           H                                                   L                                                                       >                                                   F                                                                                                               U                                                                       E                                                                       _                                                                   V                                       I                       E                                   J           A   ]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L                                                           A                                                                                               K                                                                                                           [                                                                               G                                                                                                   P                                                                                                                                       Y




=       c       ?                                                                   H                                           D                       F                                               Q                                                           D                                   E                                                       F                                                                       >                                                           G                                                                                       N                                                                                                                               M                                                                       F                                                                                   D                                                   J                                           D                                                           G                                                                                       Q                                                                                                       =                                               D                                           F                                                                   L                                                           N                                                                                                               ?                                                                                       E                                                                                       L                                                                       I                                                                                                           K                                                                                       F                                                       N                                                                                                                                   G                                                                           A                                                                                   I                                                       D                                               Q                                                           L                                           D                                   F                                                                   K                                                                                                       D                                           E                                                                   F

                        S




                        \                                                           L                                                       D                       L                                                                           L                                           A                                                       K                                                                               E                                                                       L                                                                           I                                                                                                           [                                                                           G                                                                                       P                                                                                                                                           F                                                                           K                                                                                                                               D                                                   G                                                                                                               D                                               E                                                               F                                                                                                               U                                                                                       E                                                                       _                                                                               V                                                       I                                                                   E                                                                                   J                               A                                                                                   ]                                                                           D                                                   E                                                                               F                                                                       C                                                                                                       I                                                           E                                                                       L                                                       B                               B                                                                                   F                                                   ^                                   J                       D




                        D                       E                                           F                                                                           >                                           G                                                   N                                                                                           M                                           F                                                       D                                           J                                       D                                                           J                                       G                                                                               A                                                                                                                                           L                                                                                   Q                                                               F                                                                       L                                                                                                                       L                                                                   I                                                                                                   G                                                                   Q                                               K                                                                       F                                                               Q                                                           F                                                                           K                                                                                                                               [                                                                               C                                                                                                                       D                                           E                                                                       F                                                                                                                                   U                                                                                       E                                                                           _                                                           V                                   I                                                               E                                                                   J                                   A                                                                       Y                                                                       `                           A




                                U                                               C                                                       A                                       >                                           E                                                       Q                                       G                                                       A                                               J                                   W                                                                   F                                                                                       K                                                                                                                   \                                                                                                                       L                                                                                       D                                                           L                                                                                                                                   >                                                           G                                                                               N                                                                                                                       M                                                                   F                                                               D                                   J                                           D                                       J                                                   G                                                                           A                                                                           ]                                                                                                           F                                                                       L                                                               >                                                                       E                                                                                                                               D                                           F                                                               L                                                                       N                                                                                                                                   N                                                                                                               F                                                                   N                                                                                               [                                   F                               Q




                            I                           E                                                       L                                               B                       B                                                           Q                           F                                                       N                                                                           G                                                               O                                                                           F                                                                                                                           E                                                                               J                                               I                                                                                                                           G                                                                                                   Q                                                                                                           E                                                                       F                                                                   Q                                                                                               H                                                   B                                   G                                                                       G                                                                       Q                                                                                           M                                                                           G                                                                           I                                                                   J                                                   D                                       J                                       G                                                                           A                                                                                                                                       D                                               L                                                           M                                                                                   F                                                                                                       [                                                           F                                                           H                                                   G                                                                       Q                                           F




                            F                                   ^                                                   J                               D                       J                                   A                                               X                                                                               D                                   E                                           F                                                                                                       >                                                                                       G                                                                           N                                                                                                                               M                                                                                           F                                                                                   D                                                   J                                   D                                                       J                               G                                                                               A                                                                                                                                       L                                                           Q                                               F                                                           L                                                               Y




    =       d       ?           `                   H                                                                   L                                                                       U                                                           E                                                   _                                                       V                               I                                               E                                                                       J                                           A                                                                                                                                       K                                                                       J                                                       I                                                                       >                                                                           G                                                                                           O                                                                               F                                                                       Q                                                   I                                                                                                               L                                                                                       M                                                                       F                                                                   A                                                                               L                                                                           B                                       D                                   C                                                                                                                                                   G                                                                               Q                                                                                       D                                       P                                                                                                                           G                                                                                                                       G                                                                   Q                                                                               N                                                                                                       G                                                                           Q                                               F




                                                                                _                                                       T                                       _                                                   V                                       I                                       E                                                           J                   A                                                                                                               =                                                   R                                                                                                           G                                                                                   Q                                                           A                                                                                               F                                                                               Q                                                                                                       f                                                                   _                                                                               K                                                                       X                                                                               F                                                           ?                                                                                           J                                               A                                                                               K                                                                           J                                               >                                                               L                                                                           D                                               F                                                                                                           M                                                                               F                                                               A                                                                                           L                                                           B                                               D                                               C                                                                                                   L                                                                   H                               D                                               F                                                           Q                                                                               D                       E                                   F


                                e




                                K                                           F                                               N                                                                               G                                           A                                                   I                                               D                           Q                               L                                                       D                                           J                                           G                                                                                           A                                                                                                                           G                                                                                                   H                                                                                                                   L                                                                                                                       \                                                                                                                   L                                                           D                                                   L                                                                   ]                                                               D                                           E                                                                       F                                                                   A                                                                                                                                           U                                                                                       E                                                                               _                                                                       V                                                           I                                                           E                                                                       J                                                   A                                                                                                                               I                                                       E                                                                   L                                                           B                                       B                                                                   >                                                                   L                                                               B                                   B                                       L




                                    R                                                   G                                                           _                                               Q                           D                                                                   f                                       _                                               K                                                               X                                                                       F                                                                               I                                                                                                           g                                                                                                                                               F                                                                                       F                                                                                       D                                               J                                               A                                                                       X                                                                               Y




                                    R                                                   G                                                           _                                               Q                           D                                                                   f                                       _                                               K                                                               X                                                                       F                                                                               I                                                                                                               J                                       A                                                                                   K                                                                                           J                                                           >                                                                               L                                                                       D                                   F                                                                                                                   M                                                                               F                                                               A                                                                   L                                                                       B                                   D                                               C                                                                                                                           [                                                                                   C                                                                                                                           E                                                                               G                                                                           B                                   K                                                                                       J                                               A                                                                       X                                                                                                                           Q                                           F                                                       K                                                                                                                   H                                           B                                       L                                                       X                                                   [                           C




                                        B           F                                                   H                                   D                                                   I                                       J                           K                                                           F                                                               D                                   E                                                                   F                                                                           A                                                                                                                                   Q                                           L                                                                                   J                                               I                                                                       J                                                           A                                                                           X                                                                                                                                       H                                                       B                                       L                                                                   X                                                                                                   _                                                                       M                                                                               Q                                                       J                                       X                                                                           E                                                                                       D                                                                                                   L                                                                   D                                                                                   T                                                                       A                                                                                           F                                                           F                                                                       Y




                                        `                   H                                                                       U                                               E                                               _                                                           V                                   I                                           E                                           J                                       A                                                                                                                                   H                                                   J                                               A                                                                           K                                                                                   I                                                                                                                       A                                                                                               G                                                                                                                       M                                                                               F                                                                       A                                                                           L                                                       B                                       D                                       C                                                                                                                                   G                                                                                   Q                                                                                       J                                               H                                                                                               D                                   P                                                                                                                       G                                                                                                                               G                                                                       Q                                                                                               N                                                                                                           G                                                                   Q                                       F




                                        f                               _                                                   K                                           X                                               F                                               I                                                                               K                                                   G                                                                                               A                                                                                       G                                                                       D                                                                                               J                                                   A                                                                                               K                                                                                           J                                                   >                                                                       L                                                               D                                               F                                                                                                               L                                                                   A                                                                   C                                                                                                               M                                                                                   F                                                           A                                                                               L                                                                               B                                           D                                               C                                                                   ]                                                                                               D                                       E                                                                                   F                                                                                                                   U                                                                                                   E                                                   _                                                               V                                                       I                                               E                                                                           J                                   A




                                            J               A                                                   K                                                   J                       >                                               L                                           D                               F                                                   I                                                                       A                                                                   G                                                                                                                                   M                                                                               F                                                                   A                                                                                                   L                                                                       B                                                           D                                                   C                                                                           Y                                                                                                                   h                                                                                                                                   G                                                                                                   M                                                                       F                                                               A                                                                                       L                                                                       B                               D                                                   C                                                                                                                                           J                                   I                                                                                                           J                                       A                                                                                       K                                                                   J                                                   >                                                                           L                                               D                                   F                                                               K                                                                                                           [                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               j                                                                                                                                                     




                                        j                                                                                                                                                                                                        #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9




!           .           #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




    !           k           #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 "                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  %                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




        !           l           #                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       :                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2




                                                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               #                                                   




                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                            Q                           L                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N                                                                                                   X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       "                                                                       m                                                                                                                                                                                                               n                                               o                                                                   p                                   q                                                                                                                       &                                                                               r                                       s                                                                                                                                                               7                                                                   t                       s                               u
                                             KITEI (COMPULSORY KATA)

                                                                            II          Focus

                                                                        ~               One second

                                                                                        Prolonged focus
                                                                        ~
                                                                                   •    Normal speed

                                                                    ~              •    Faster speed

                                                               --==>"':'>        -"'.   Fastest speed




                   ~
                         n                   Gyaku




                ~
                               /~




                                  ):         -ZUkl




                                                         ~

  Stay in                                            ~
         ~ ~.

  Zen-kutsu




         -. -.  -.-.
                                    ""
                                         N


                              ~4



  •..,..            ..••• Pivot
 •••••.•......••         : clockwise

.••...              ~.      Pivot
                         ': counterclock-
  ..............            wise
                                                                      "       8
                                                            ~
                                                                      :t




  Kote-gaeshi
  (kote=wrist,
  gaeshi=turn)
  grab




                     E----
                             Kiba-dachi     ~        ~                    Kei-tow-uchi



  ~                  C        10

                     ----------
                                     \\                                   ~
                                                                              ~'r
                                                                                  h,
Kote-gaeshi Part-3     Kote-gaeshi Part-2       Kote-gaeshi Part-l
                                                                                     f;j.
                                                                                  "'@).,




~~                                                                   &'n
                                                c!J)
         , , ,
Kote-gaeshi   Part-3      Kote-gaeshi   Part-2               Kote-gaeshi   Part-l




~l                        ~




                  ~            N
="" ~                                            ~\            :::l:'"" \ij         ~ ~.~"'

5
         ~.
       d)......                 '<"
                                                 v-~ 1!! !"~ """
                                                   ~ ~                                  ?:! nIYJ             :::l:'""



          ~                    //       -
                                          ~
                                                                    (~


                                                             13b":~",-->
                                                                                    ~

                                                                                           <S$)
                                                                                               /)~\
                                                                                                 (d)
              ""'~.
              •••• 00,,",' •.....                   ..' "
                                                 .. ,••.••                              /h..                  1<1>   N
              "'""''"=.~                           _""M""                                            ....-
          Kitei-6




--
     38
 A
                                        n~EIll           ~




,. ~   ~--'::::::--45 ""'."",
                      ~,,",,,         -'"~ ,~,
                                           '--Y/      C~
                                                       l'--",


                                //~          44b __
n   Right wrist

    block         ~     Hook   WI
                                 "th

                        left wrist at




                  ~m;"-                 'f'c .       Kote-gaeshi
                                                     grab




                                                              ~

                                                             ~
                                                   «>-¥"




                                        ----~    """""47




                   -- --Yame

                                        ----
                         Article 1
                         General




Same as Kurnite Competition Area provided in Article 1-1 (see
Appendix I) except:

Court Judge placement is set up as those set up in Kata Competition
Rules Article 1-2. (See Appendix II).




A.      2-person team (man-man and woman-man) demonstrates
        offense and defense within Competition Area with winners
        based on highest scores.

B.      Demonstrations   must be completed under the following
        conditions:

        (1)      Offense and defense demonstrate choreographed
                 sequences for period of one minute (+ or - 5
                 seconds). Time is calculated from point at which
                 either competitor starts to move and continues
                 until both competitors return to Shizen-tai or
                 directly to Sei-za (formal floor sitting position).
                 As soon as competitors return to Shizen-tai (or Sei-
                 za) the clock stops. No weapons allowed. But in
                 addition to required techniques, any other
                 technique is allowed.
           Exception: No Nuki-te or finger attack to eyes
allowed.

(2)        Offense side techniques must include Choku-zuki
           (Straight Punch), Mae-geri (Front Kick), Mawashi-
           geri (Roundhouse Kick), and Ushiro-geri (Back
           Kick).

           Remarks:
           (a) Attack must be directed at target.
           (b) Breaking balance is allowed.
           (c) Grabbing and clinching are allowed.



           (a)     Defense side must avoid offensive attack
                   by Uke (Block), Sabaki (Shifting) or
                   Kawashi (Switching).

           (b)     Counter-attack techniques allowed are
                   Tsuki (Punching), Uchi (Striking), Ate
                   (Smashing), Keri (Kicking) as stated in
                   Kumite Rules Article 1-3-F.

           (c)     Targets: Jo-dan (face, head area), Chu-dan
                   (stomach area), Ge-dan (low stomach).

           (d)     Required: Proper Todome (Finishing
                   Blow) technique.

                   Remark:
                      Breaking balance, grabbing and
                      clinching are only allowed in
                      conjunction with counter-attack
                      technique.

(4)        Contact is prohibited for both sides except in
           blocking techniques on arm or leg or when
           breaking balance.
     (5)     Either alternate both sides in offense/defense or
             only one side stays as either offense or defense;
             except for mixed division where only men can
             attack.

     (6)     Competitors must keep Zan-shin (mental and
             physical preparedness) between techniques prior to
             next movement.

     (7)     At the end of the demonstration, one side must
             demonstrate Todome technique (in mixed, only
             women's side).

             Remarks:
             (a)    Todome-waza is allowed only one time at
                    the end of the demonstration.

             (b)      In Mixed category, only the women's side
                      delivers the Todome.




A.   At elimination time, the scoring shall be determined on the
     basis of the viewpoint of Judges according to the formula
     of Basic Points minus Penalty Points.

     At final match time, the scoring formula shall be Basic
     Points plus Skill Points minus Penalty Points.
             (a)    Main demonstrators scored on degree or
                    rate of power generated by the body
                    dynamics and muscle action.

             (b)    Main demonstrators scored by degree of
                    smooth continuity of technique
                    combination.

             (c)    Main demonstrators scored by degree of
                    balance (stance, posture and coherence or
                    movements).



             (a)    Correctness of Timing as established by
                    Kumite Rules Article 1-3-A-(2).

             (b)    Ma-ai (effective distance) - correctness of
                    distance for proper application of technique



             Degree of Martial Arts fighting spirit including
             degree of emotional stability, mental concentration,
             Zan-shin and high character (Kurai).




             (a)    Demonstration of principles and techniques
                    of Traditional Karate




C.   Skill Points are determined by two factors:
                         90
      Degree of technical details plus understanding of
      mental and spiritual elements.



      This refers to the level of the impression the
      demonstrators make on the observer as a result of
      both the realistic and efficient execution of
      movement, and the display of high level of
      technical skill with grace and strong spirit.



(1)   Omission of required technique as stated in Article
      l-3-B-(2)

(2)   Either too much or too little time relative to time
      requirement for demonstration as stated in Article
      l-3-B-(l )




(5)   Offense technique completely misdirected at
      opponent
                      See Kumite Rules Article 1-9-D-(1) for contact
                      definitions. All decisions regarding level of
                      contact made by Medical Judge.




            (11)       Starting offensive attack by woman other than
                       counter-attack or feint (fake)

            (12)      Man using Todome in mixed divisions against
                      woman

            (13)       Forgetting to bow to Shu-shin (Referee) and
                       opponent at either beginning or end of
                       demonstration (re: Article 2-4)

            (14)       Either competitor moving out of competition area
                       results in Jo-gai (any part of athlete's body going
                       out of Competition Area)

            (15)       After completion of En-bu, when competitors bow
                       to Shu-shin they are in an incorrect position and/or
                       face incorrect direction (from original)




            Very                    Below          Above          Very
                      Bad    Poor           Avg.           Good          Excellent
            Bad                     Avg.           Avg.           Good
TECHNIQUE    1.2      I.3    1.4     1.5     1.6    I.7     1.8    1.9      2.0
TlMING/      1.2      I.3    1.4     1.5     1.6    I.7     1.8    1.9      2.0
MA-AI
BUDO         1.2      I.3     1.4    1.5     1.6    1.7     1.8    1.9      2.0
ASPECT
CHOREOGRA    1.2      I.3     1.4    I.5     1.6    I.7     1.8    1.9      2.0
PHY

                       5.2    5.6    6.0    6.4      6.8    7.2    7.6
TOTAL       +---5.1                                                          8
                      -5.5   -5.9   -6.3    -6.7    -7.1   -7.5   -7.9
               Very                          ~elow               '\bove                  Very
                          Bad      Poor                  Avg.               Good                ~xcellent
               Bad                            Avg.                Avg.                   Good
MASTERY                                       I.3                  1.6
                1.0       1.1      1.2                    1.5                1.8          1.9         2.0
IMPRESSION                                    1.4                  I.7




                                                                 Grading
                                Type                                                     Deductions
                                                                  Scale
             I. Omission ofrequired          technique                             0.2 each instance

             2. Over/under      time limit                                         0.2 per 5 seconds

             3. HesitationlBreak                                                   0.2 each instance

             4. No Todome (Final)                                                  0.5

             5. Offense/ Off target                                                0.2 each instance

             6. Defense/ Todome-waza            off
                                                                                   0.2 each instance
                target
             7. Defense mistake                                                    0.2 each instance

             8. Finger attack to eyes                                              0.2 each instance
             9. Defense/ Unnecessary
                                                                                   0.2 each instance
                grab/clinch
             10. Contact (Light or Moderate)                                       0.2 each instance

             II. Woman/ using offense attack                                       0.2 each instance

             12. Man/ Todome against woman                                         0.2 each instance

             13. No bowing                                                         0.2 each instance

             14. Jo-gai                                                            0.2 each instance

             15. Incorrect finishing                            Position           0.2 per half step
                 position/direction                             Direction          0.2 per 30°
             16. Todome used more than one                                         0.2 each
                 time                                                              occurrence


                 Remark:
                                Penalty points are cumulative per category.
        The Judges should meet at least twenty-four hours prior to
        the tournament in order to ensure scoring uniformity and
        consistency through review of at least three model matches.

        If Judges are unable to meet prior to the tournament, they
        may ensure scoring uniformity by together reviewing
        scores of first match of the tournament (before assigning
        final score).




A Han-soku shall be declared against a competitor in the following
cases. The Shu-shin's indication of a Han-soku shall be the holding
of a zero card overhead.

A.      When there is a delay or lapse of movement of estimated
        five seconds or longer during the performance of the
        demonstration;

B.      When the competitor(s)   speaks during the performance of
        the demonstration;

C.      When the competitor(s) receives prompting or coaching
        from anyone in the Competition Area during the
        performance of the demonstration;

D.      When the competitor(s)   intentionally ignores the Shu-shin's
        instructions;

E.      When the competitor's conduct or demeanor is unruly or
        impolite or generally not consistent with the normally
        accepted behavior expected in the Competition Area;




        Remarks:
        (1)      See Kumite Rules Article l-9-D-(1) for contact
                 definition. All decisions regarding level of contact
                 made by Medical Judge.
     (2)     Han-soku applies when heavy contact is
             discovered during or after demonstration.

     Feigning serious injury during demonstration shall incur
     the same penalty (Han-soku) as heavy contact.

G.   When the competitor seriously violates any of the
     Competition Rules.




                     Article 2
                    Competition
A.      Apply Kata Rules Article 2-4, A, B, D, E which refer to
        teams.

B.      In case of a Kettei-sen, competitors may perform same or
        different choreography than original.



The operation of the competition shall be in accordance with the
following order:




        (1)      Competitors take starting positions, then bow to
                 Shu-shin and each other, then begin demonstration.
                 Competitors may bow from standing position or
                 Sei-za position.

        (2)      After demonstration, competitors return to original
                 position, bow to each other, then bow to Shu-shin
                 and withdraw from the Competition Area when
                 ordered to by Shu-shin.

                 Remark:
                 Competitors who begin with standing bow must
                 end with standing bow. Competitors who begin
                 with floor sitting bow must end with floor sitting
                 bow. A competitor who begins with standing bow
                 and ends with floor sitting bow (or vice versa) will
                 receive a "no bowing" penalty.

        (3)      Timer reports to Shu-shin the length of the
                 demonstration as to over or under time limit.
(4)    Shu-shin confirms penalty point, and if penalty
       confirmed, calls Court Judges meeting to decide
       penalty points. (Procedures - see Kata rules
       Article 2-7-B-(4)).

(5)    After penalty is confirmed, then the Court Judges
       shall complete their Scoring Forms (See Appendix
       XV).

(6)    The Recorder shall collect the scoring forms from
       each Court Judge.

(7)    Shu-shin shall then request their presentation of
       the scores by blowing one long whistle followed
       by one short, sharp whistle. The Court Judges
       shall each present their scoring by holding their
       own Scoring Boards overhead.

(8)    The Announcer shall read each score aloud starting
       with the Shu-shin and proceeding clockwise. If a
       score is misread, the Shu-shin shall request a
       correction from the Announcer. To direct the
       Court Judges to lower their Scoring Boards after
       they have been read correctly by the Announcer,
       the Shu-shin shall blow one, short whistle.

(9)    The Announcer shall then announce the average
       score.

(10)   In case of tie score, Kertei-sen is held. Court
       Judges decide without raising Scoring Boards.




                    Article 3
                    Judging
Apply Kata Rules Article 3-2. Except regarding Scoring Forms
(See Appendix XV).




A.      Shu-shin or two or more Fuku-shin indicate heavy contact.
        Shu-shin must call Medical Judge and tournament Doctors,
        then call Court Judges' Meeting to decide penalty based on
        Medical Judge's Report.




                         Article 4
                    Judging Operation




                        Article 5
         Supplement to Judging Operation Rules
Exception:
Announcement   of Synchronized Kata.
                     Article 1
                     General




     Use Kata Competition Area rules (Kata Rules, Article 1-2),
     but create 2 more competitors' position spaces 1.5 m to the
     left and right of the present rear central position and five
     Judges' chairs (See Appendix III).



A.   Use Kumite Rules Article 1-13 but deleting the Repechage
     system. (See Appendix VII)

B.   Each elimination alternates between Kumite and Ki-tei
     competition.

     Remark:
     Final match is Kumite;
     Semi-fmal match is Ki-tei;
     Third place match is Kumite.
                        Article 2
                       Competition




Use Kumite Rules or Ko-go Kumite Rules as in individual matches
other than specified here.




        After each World Traditional Karate Championship, the
        ITKF Technical Committee announces a new Ki-tei to be
        performed at the following World Championship.




        Other than that provided by these rules, use the Kata Rules
        of individual matches. Exception: when the Court Judges
        of I Shu-shin (Referee) and 4 Fuku-shin (Comer Judges)
        total 5 judges and two competitors start demonstrations
        simultaneously. (See Appendix III for placement of
        Judges)




        (2)     Competition
                              102
(a)   The two competitors take their starting
      positions at the same time; one Aka (red)
      (left side facing Main Seating), one Shiro
      (white) (right side facing Main Seating).
      Then bow to the Shu-shin, bow to each
      other, and then again face Shu-shin.




(b)   The Shu-shin indicates "Hajime" (start),
      and both start the Ki-tei.

(c)   At the end of the Ki-tei demonstration,
      competitors, after bowing to each other
      and then to Shu-shin, shall await the
      Judges' decision from the finishing
      position, facing the Shu-shin in Shizen-tai
      (open leg natural stance).


(d)   Shu-shin confirms penalty points and, if
      penalty confirmed, calls Court Judges
      meeting to decide penalty points.
      (Procedures: see Kata Rules Article 2-7-
      B-(4»

(e)   After Han-soku or penalty confirmed, the
      Judges calculate the scores on the Ki-tei
      Scoring Forms.

(f)   After the Court Judges calculate the fmal
      score, they must indicate either Aka or
      Shiro side winner. Then the Shu-shin
      makes one long and one short whistle
      blow; at the same time, the Shu-shin and
      the Fuku-shin raise the winning side's flag
      (Aka or Shiro).

      Note: A tie match cannot be indicated;
      either Aka or Shiro side must be selected.
      Shu-shin counts the Judges' Flags and
      determines Aka or Shiro winner by
      majority. Shu-shin blows whistle and
      Judges lower their Flags.

(g)   Shu-shin raises winner's Flag (Aka or
      Shiro), then declares winner. The
      competitors bow to the Shu-shin, then to
      each other. They then leave the
      Competition Area.

(h)   Recorder(s) collect Court Judges' Scoring
      Forms.




      i)      After the winner is declared by
              the Shu-shin, the Announcer
              announces the winner's name, but
              no score IS gIven.

      ii)     After the end of the match, the
              Recorder immediately checks the
              Court Judges' Scoring Forms. In
              case a scoring form does not
              match the Judge's Flag (Aka or
              Shiro), report the error to the Shu-
              shin, then announce the correct
              WInner.

              The announcement of the change
              in the winner's name must be
              made before the next round
              begins.
  (2)        Aka and Shiro Flags
  (3)        Official Ki-tei Scoring Form (see Appendix XIV)
  (4)        Writing Instrument (pen or pencil)
  (5)        Writing Board



  (1)        Use Kata Rules Article 1-4-E-(1) and (2) as Basic
             and Skill Points together for Kata Scoring.



                       Below           Above         Very
               Poor             Avg.          Good          Excellent
                       AVl!:.          AVl!:.        Good
BODY                   1.0+     1.2+   1.4+   1.6+   1.8+
               0.8+                                            2.0
DYNAMICS
POWER          0.8+    1.0+     1.2+   1.4+   1.6+   1.8+      2.0
FORM           0.8+    1.0+     1.2+   1.4+   1.6+   1.8+      2.0
TRANSITION     0.8+    1.0+     1.2+   1.4+   1.6+   1.8+      2.0
MASTERY                 1.0+    1.2+   1.4+   1.6+   1.8+
                0.8+                                           2.0
IMPRESSION
TOTAL          .-4.0+ 5.0+      6.0+   7.0+   8.0+   9.0+      10


   (2)       Use the penalty points stated in Kata Rules Article
             1-4-E-(4) and the following additional penalty
             points:

             (a)       Mistake in sequence, including
                       misplacement of "Ki-ai" -0.2 each
                       instance.

             (b)        Skipping technique, including omission of
                        "Ki-ai" -0.2 each instance.



   Use Kata Rules Article 1-5 as follows, except in the
   following additions:
Winners of Ki-tei participate in next round of Kumite, and then
those winners compete in Ki-tei (alternate).
                               Article 1
                               General




     Ko-go Kumite is a specific format of Kurnite competition which
     designates competitors as either Offense or Defense at the start of
     each match.

2.   Ko-go Kumite follows General Kumite Rules with the following
     exceptions:

         •   Procedure
         •   Operation of Competition
         •   Judging Operation
         •   Scoring and Penalty Points
         •   Violations and Penalty
         •   Terms and Signals




                              Article 2
                              Procedure


1.   Competition is divided into six matches. Each competitor is
     designated "offense" three times and must initiate attack. The other
     competitor is designated "defense" and must respond to the attack.
     Remark: Aka (Red) side attacks first and attacks three times in a
     row, followed by Shiro (White) side.

     On elimination chart:
      Aka is placed on top
      Shiro is placed on bottom
       Aka on left side of chart
       Shiro on right side of chart

2.   Each match is completely independent.      Penalty is not carried over
     to the next match.

     Remark: In cases of "Han-soku", "Shi-kkaku", Doctor's Stop or
     Withdraw, no more matches take place. Opponent is declared the
     Willner.




     In case of a tie (when the points are equal), then the "Kettei-sen"
     match takes place in which each competitor attacks and defends
     three times, but this time, alternately initiating the attack, beginning
     with Aka (Red) side. In case one side scores "Waza-ari" or "Ippon",
     then that side is declared winner. Ifno "Waza-ari" or "Ippon", then
     total score determines winner. If score is still tied, then the court
     judges decide on the winner (applied as General Kumite Rules).




                                     Article 3
                            Operation of Competition




     (2)      Shu-shin indicates offense side by the appropriate arm
              signal for offense side and verbally announcing the order of
              each attack, i.e. "Ko-geki Ik-kai", "Ko-geki Ni-kai", "Ko-
              geki San-kai".




     (4)      Following indication of attacking side and the number of
              the attack, Shu-shin announces "Shobu Ippon Haijme" to
              begin the match.
A.   Must begin attack within 10 seconds after "Hajime". After
     10 seconds and no attack is initiated, this is recognized as
     "Jikan".

B.   When "Offense" side's leading hand comes within
     estimated touching distance of "Defense" side's leading
     hand; then "Offense" side cannot hold both hands more
     than 45° down or hide both hands behind body line. If so,
     this is recognized as "Kakushi".

C.   Limited to maximum four techniques including feint and
     break-balance technique.

     Exception: After last technique and "Defense" side blocks
     and counterattacks, "Offense" side can shift or block and
     counterattack only one time; this is acceptable.



A.   Can only initiate technique after "Offense" side physically
     begins attack. Any physical movement used as a feint or
     faking attack from "Offense" side is recognized as
     initiating attack.
     Note: Verbal sound without physical movement is not
     recognized as an attack.

     If "Defense" side's initiates technique before "Offense"
     side attacks: this is recognized as "Saki".

B.   If either side's leading hand can touch opponent's hand
     (touching distance), then, there is no need for "Defense"
     side to wait for actual "Offense" side to initiate defensive
     counter. In this case, "Defense" side can, in place, touch
     without body shifting "Offense" side's leading hand or arm,
     then initiate technique.

C.   Counter attack must be continuous after blocking or
     shifting.
D.       If "Offense" side has executed 4 attack techniques and
         "Defense" side only incompletely or ineffectively blocks or
         shifts to escape, this is recognized as "Nige-tai".




                          Article 4
                     Judging Operation




C.   When either side's leading hand can touch opponent's body:
     "Chika-ma" (too close)

D. When "Offense" side, using combination techniques, stops
   continuation within combination.

E.   When "Offense" side's combination four techniques are
     finished, or after "Offense" side's last technique, "Defense"
     side counterattacks and "Offense" side counter-counter attacks
     is over. (See Article 3-2-C)

F.   When "Defense" side blocks or shifts but counterattack is not
     continuation of blocking or shifting movement. (See Article 3-
     3-C)

G. When both sides continue exchange of Offense/Defense
   techniques over four times.
        M. When "Tento" is recognized. (as Kumite Rules Article 1-7-B-
           (1»

2.      At the end of each match, Shu-shin indicates competitors to return
        to starting positions, and then declares points, penalty or necessary
        direction. Then, Shu-shin continues with next match. (as Article 3-
        I)

3.      At the completion of all six matches (three offense and three
        defense for each competitor), the Shu-Shin confirms score with the
        Kansa, and then declares the winner.




                                  Article 5
                          Violations and Penalties


In addition to General Kumite Rules, penalty points are given to the
opponent for violations in the following cases:

      l. In case of"Jikan"        (Article 3-2-A)                      2 points
      2. In case of"Kakushi"      (Article 3-2-B)                      2 points
      3. In case of "Saki"        (Article 3-3-A)                      2 points
      4. In case of "Nige-tai"    (Article 3-3-I»                      2 points
      5. In case of "Tento"       (Apply General Kumite Rules)         I point

In case of violation of general Kumite Rules - other than the Ko-go Kumite
Rules - Shu-shin gives the penalty after confirming with the court judges,
without any informal verbal warning.



                                  Article 6
                    Additional Judges Terms and Signals
                                     III
                                            METHOD      OF SIGNALING
         TERM
                                  SHU-SHIN                          FUKU-SHIN
                       Hands form a "T", then with
                       both hands open, palms facing
I.   Jikan
                       each other at side of head (as
     (Article 3-2-A)
                       in General Kumite Rules
                       HAto")

     Kakushi           Bring both hands together to      "Offense" side flag moves to
2.
     (Article 3-2-B)   backside of body                  back side of body
                       Index finger shifting from
     Saki                                                Top of flag shifting from
3.                     "Defense" side to "Offense"
     (Article 3-3-A)                                     "Defense" side to "Offense"    side
                       side
                                                         "Defense" side flag, while
     Nige-tai          "Defense" side hand open with
4.                                                       pointed straight up, moves to side
     (Article 3-3-D)   palm pushing backward
                                                         of body
                       Bring both palms together,        Bring both flagpoles together,
     Chika-ma
5.                     fingers up, in front of chest     tops pointed up, in front of chest
     (Article 4-1-C)
                       area                              area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !                               "                           #                               $

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %                                                       &                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                              (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 &                                                           '                                                                               )       *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    #                                                           +                                               ,                           "                           +                       -           ,                           .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '                                                   '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     









                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                              (                               *               




    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    



                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /
                                                                                                                                                            2                                                                                                                                                  (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                     0                                                                               *           '                   *                           0                                                                                                                           /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

                                                                        3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4                                   



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     /                           /                   /                               /                                   /                       /                   /                   /                       /               /                   /               /                   /               /           /                   /           /                               /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6                               7               8                   9   :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '                                                                                       '                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2                                                                                                         5                                                                                       '                               (                                                  0                   '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2                                                                                                                                 *                                                                                                                                      *               0               '                                                                                                                                                                                                          ;                       %   <                                                   %               =                       >                           ;           %           ?                               =                                   ;                       @                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A                   B                                               C                                       D




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                




                                                    (                                                      '                                                                                     




                    E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                *   (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




            F                                           G




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /           /               /                   /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '                                                                                       '                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2                                                                                                                                 *                                                                                      H                                                                                   *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *           0                                           '                                                                                                                       2                                                   %                   =                               >                                       ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             J




                                                                                                                                        



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                            &                                                                                          *           '                                                                                  '                                               *                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L               M                               N                       O                                                                                                             

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (                                                                                                                           *               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                   



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2                                                                                                                                            0                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                                                          *                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (                                                                                                                                                                      '                                                                                          2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P                                       Q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R                                                                           S                                                                                       '                               



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                            *               '                                       *                                                                               0




            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P                                           W                                                                                   W                                                                                               W                                           W




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     V




                T               T   U           T




                        X                   X




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  '                                                                       '                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W                                   W




                Y                       Z




                                                                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                   '               *                                                                                                                                                  '                                                   '                   
                                                                                                                                                    J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '                                                           '                                                   *           '                                                                                                              



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                                                           &                                                       '                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2                               2




                                                                                            



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                           0                                                                              &                                                                                                                                          0                               *       ]                                  '               *                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                               2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '                                                                                                             (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ^               _                   `




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '                                                                               '                                                                                                                                                                                                              2                                                                                                      0                                                                                              '                                                                                                                                                                   *                       0                                                       '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f                                                       g                                                                                   h                                                                               i                                                   j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a                                                                                                   b                               c                                                               d                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,                                                                                   k                                                           l                   $                                                       -                       m                                           n                                                       o                                               #                                                   p                       q                           r                   s           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a                           b               c                                                                               d                                                                                                           u                           v                               w                                   x           y                                   z                                                                                                           y                                   y                                           y               y               y                   y           y                   y                       y                                           y                                           y                                   y                               y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                    {                       |   |   {


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                }




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         




                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                        ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    %                                               &               '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &                                   '                                                           )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '                                       *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 




~




                                                                                                                                I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /                                                                               /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /                                                                                                                       /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                                                                                     '           *                                                   0                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /                                                                                                                       /                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /                                                                                       /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4




                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                                             &                                                   0                                           *                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /                                                                                                   /                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                                    '                               *                                       (                                                                   *                       0                                                                                                                                                          (                                                                                             *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /                                                                                   /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




    ~




                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /                                                                                                               /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /                                                                               /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                       &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4                                       



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '                                                                                       '                                                                                                                                          2                                                                             5                                                                                                               '                               (                                                      0                               '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /                                                                                                                   /       /                       /       /   /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '                                           '                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2                                                                                                                                                      0                                          &                                      0                                   *       ]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *                                                                     '                           *                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

                                                                                                



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                            &                                                                                                  *           '                                                                                                              '                                               *                                                                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *                   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (                                                                                                       *           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                       



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (                                                                                                                                  '                                                                                                                  2               

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                      *               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I                                               



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '                           *                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2                                               2                                                                          0                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '                                   &                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                               2                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                                                                                  '           *                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   )               V                                                           '                                                                                             &                       0                                           *                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2                                                                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *       2                                       2                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                                             @
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                   *                                                                                                                                                         '                                       *                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4                                                                                       

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                                                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       *       2                                   2                                                                                                                        0                               '                                                                                                               '                                                                                                                 &                                   0                   *                                                                                                                          @
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5




        ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *                   '                                       *                                                       0




        ~                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         V

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                        4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                0                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *                                                           '                                       *           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4




                                '                                                                                         &                                       0                                                                       *                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J




        ~




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '                                                                   '                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                4




                                                                           '               *                                                                                                                                                                              '                                               *               
                                                                                                            J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '                                               *               *                   '                                                                                                                      



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '                                                                                   '                                                                                                                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                              '                                                                                                                                                                                                  *               0               '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                  INDIVIDUAL                    KUMITE SCORING RECORD
DIVISiON: M I W         __           ROUND                                  BLOCK:                   NO.:               _

 AKA:                            I SHIRO;                          AKA:                    I SHIRO;
       ORIGINAL U                         KETIEI-SEN U                 ORIGINAL LJ               KETIEI-SEN I I
      DETAIL   SCORE                     DETAIL    SCORE              DETAIL    SCORE            DETAIL    SCORE




 TOTAL                                 TOTAL                       TOTAL                       TOTAL
 NOTE:                                 NOTE:                       NOTE:                       NOTE:
Ninner IJ LoserU             Draw LI WinnerU        Loser II       Winner I I Loser II   Drawl I Winner I I Loser 1.1
 AKA:                             I SHIRO:                         AKA:                    I SHIRO:
       ORIGINAL U                        KETIEI-SEN U                  ORIGINAL []               KETIEI-SEN I I
      DETAIL   SCORE                     DETAIL    SCORE              DETAIL    SCORE            DETAIL    SCORE




 TOTAL                                 TOTAL                        TOTAL                      TOTAL
 NOTE:                                 NOTE:                        NOTE:                       NOTE:
Winner I I Loser II          DrawU       Winner I I Loser IJ       Winner I I Loser II   Drawl I Winner I I Loser I I


          POINTS     & PENAL TV             SCORE       KEY:

 1.                                            10       (Point)         Ippon        0        (Penalty)   Shi-kkaku         OQ

 2.                                            4                        Waza-ari     ~                    Han-soku          @

 3.        nent Receives      Chui             4        (Target)        Jo-dan       J                    Chui              &
 4.     pponent   Receives    Kei-koku         2                        Chu-dan      C                    Kei-koku           X
 5.        nent Commits       Jo-Gai           2        (Technique)     Tsuki        T                    Jo-gai             -l
       pponent received Ten-to                                            Uchi       U                    Ten-to            /(f
 6.     nalty but not executed due
      o ex iration of time                                              Ate          A        (Medical)   Doctor's
                                                                          Keri       K                           Stop       OS

                                                        * Example     of Point
                                                          Chu-dan .. Tsuki· Waza- ari: ,l\,CT
         AKA (RED)        SHIRO (WHITE)    DIVISION: M I W          __       ROUND

                                           BLOCK:                  NO.:         __
        Name of Team       Name of Team
      DETAILS   SCORE   DETAILS    SCORE
                                                                               CORE
                                                                                 10
                                                                                  4
 1.                                                                               4
                                                                                  2
                                                                                  2




 2.


                                             KEY:   (Point)       Ippon       ......
                                                                                   0
                                                                  Waza-ari    ......Ii.
                                                    (Target)      Jo-dan      ...... J
                                                                  Chu-dan     ...... C
 3.                                                 (Technique)   Tsuki       ...... T
                                                                  Uchi        ...... U
                                                                  Ate         ...... A
                                                                  Keri        ...... K
       TOTAL             TOTAL                      (Penalty)     Han-soku    ......
                                                                                  0
                                                                  Chui         ......x
                                                                  Kei-koku    .....
                                                                                &
                                                                  Jo-gai      •••••• -.L
 4.                                                               Ten-to      ......
                                                                                  /0
                                                    (Medical)     Doctor's
                                                                  Stop
                                            •. Example of Point
                                                     Chu-dan - Tsuki - Waza-ari: t.CT


 5.



      UWINNER           IJWINNER
~ES
      ULOSER            LJ LOSER
           VERY         BAD   POOR     BELOW          AVG.        ABOVE           GOOD       VERY               EXCEL.    SCORE
            BAD                         AVG.                       AVG.                      GOOD
       ~
            5.1         5.2    5.6         6.0           6.4        6.8            7.2            7.6             8.0     (+)

       ~    t
            ()
                        5.3
                        5.4
                        5.5
                               5.7
                               5.8
                               5.9
                                           6.1
                                           6.2
                                           6.3
                                                         6.5
                                                         6.6
                                                         6.7
                                                                    6.9
                                                                    7.0
                                                                    7.1
                                                                                   7.3
                                                                                   7.4
                                                                                   7.5
                                                                                                  7.7
                                                                                                  7.8
                                                                                                  7.9
"
              FROM
                                                                                                                          /
                              BAD      SLiGHTL        SAME       5L1GHTL'I        GOOD        VERY
             OVERVIEW                   WORSE                     BETTER                      GOOD
~
           BODY               - 0.2        - 0.1          0        + 0.1          +0.2         +0.3
~          DYNAMICS
a          POWER              -0.2         - 0.1          0        + 0.1          +0.2         +0.3

           FORM               - 0.2        - 0.1          0        +0.1           + 0.2        +0.3

       <   TRANSITION         - 0.2        - 0.1          0        + 0.1          +0.2         +0.3

                                                                                                                          (+1-)
                              SUB-TOTAL     OF ADJUSTMENT ------------------

                                                                                                                          (+)
                              SUB-TOTAL      OF BASIC POINTS (Eliminalionl{1)               + (2)-

~MASTERY
  IMPRESSIO
                  )J    1.1    1.2
                                            1.3
                                            1.4          1.5
                                                                    1.6
                                                                    1.7            1.8             1.9            2.0
                                                                                                                          (+)

a:
                                                                                                                          (+)
                              SUB-TOTAL     OF BASIC & SKILL POINTS (Final)               G) +Q          ----

       HESITATION             000000                                                      o 0 0 [J [J 0 X 0.1
                              A.IN PLACE      000XO.1                   B. MOVING (Y. STEP)              00       XO.3
       LOSS OF BALANCE
~                             C. FALLING      000         XO.5          D. COMPLETE        FALL          on       X 1.0

                                                                                          000000                  XO.1
       POSITION               A. V. STEP
~                                                                                          o U U U U 0 XO.2
..
..•.                          B.30"

                              A. FORGOT TO BOW
<l                                                                                                        U U XO.2
       ETIQUETTE
~                             B.ATTITUDE                            POOR 0          XO.3                 BAD 0 XO.5

                              A. SLIGHTLY OFF            (1-4)     [] 0 0 OXO.1               o 5 OR OVER 0.5
       SYNCHRONIZATION        B. OFF                     (1-2)     00      XO.3               03        OR OVER 0.7
                              C. EXTREMELY         OFF             01.0
                                                                                                                           (-)
                                 SUB-TOTAL         OF PENAL TV POINTS


                                FINALSCORE
                                ELiMINAnOt(]-@                   FINAl(])-@-------------
           VERY       BAD         POOR      BELOW            AVG.       ABOVE      GOOD          VERY              EXCEL.   SCORE
    :;;:    BAD                              AVG.                        AVG.                    GOOD

    >       4.3     4.4
                      .5.6.7
                                 5.2
                                  .3.4 .5
                                            6.0
                                             .1 .2 .3
                                                          6.8
                                                           .9
                                                                        7.6
                                                                         .7.8.9
                                                                                   8.4
                                                                                     .5.6.7
                                                                                                 9.2
                                                                                                  .3.4.5
                                                                                                                    10.0    (+)


            ~         .8.9        .6.7.8     .4.5.6       7.0           8.0          .8.9         .6.7.8
    ~        ()     5.0            .9        .7             .1.2.3       .1.2.3    9.0             .9
                      .1                                    .4.5                     .1



~
               FROM
             OVERVIEW
                                   BAD
                                            SLiGHTL
                                             WORSE
                                                             SAME
                                                                       ~L1GHTL'V
                                                                        BETIER
                                                                                   GOOD
                                                                                                 VERY
                                                                                                 GOOD                       /
           KATA                   -.3 -.4      -.1 -.2        0         +.1 +.2    +.3 +.4       +.5 +.6

           APPLICATION      OF
                                  -.3 -.4      -.1 -.2        0         +.1 +.2    +.3 +.4       +.5 +.6
           TECHNIQUE

           TIMING / MA-AI         -.3 -.4      -.1 -.2         0        +.1 +.2    +.3 +.4       +.5 +.6
~
    c
           CHOREOGRAPHY           -.3 -.4      -.1 -.2         0        +.1 +.2    +.3 +.4       +.5 +.6

                                                                                                                            (+/-)
                                     SUB-TOTAL      OF ADJUSTMENT                                       ------
                                                                                                                            (+)
                            SUB-TOTAL    OF SYNCHRONIZED             KATAAPPLICATIONG)          +/-G)      -----



    HESITATION                                                                     0000000                         XO.1

                                  A.IN PLACE             0    X 0.1       B. MOVING (Yz STEP)               0 XO.3
    LOSS OF BALANCE
                                  C. FALLING             0    XO.5         D. COMPLETE        FALL          0 X 1.0
                                                         - FEWER OR MORE ATIACKS
                                  A.OFFENSE                                                                 0 XO.5
                                                           THAN ALLOWED

                                  B. OFFENSE             - NO 2 PERSONS A TI ACK                            0 XO.5
                                                         - 1'" TECHNIQUE HAS
    ERROR OF                      C.DEFENSE
                                                            DIFFERENCE{S)                                   n      XO.3
    APPLICATION
                                  D.DEFENSE              - DIFFERENT TECHNIQUE{S)                           rJ     XO.3
~
                                                                                          Yo. STEP X        U      XO.1
                                  E. POSITION
~                                                                                               30" X       0 XO.2
    UNREALISTIC
                                                                                                            0 XO.2
~   TECHNIQUE
                                  A. FORGOT TO BOW                                                                 XO.2
                                                                                                        DO
    ETIQUETIE
                                  B.ATIITUDE                           POOR 0      XO.3              BAD 0         XO.5
                                                                                                                            (-)
                                                         SUB-TOTAL OF PENALTY POINTS


                                                                       FINAL   SCOREG--G>-------
     TRADITIONAL KARATE OFFICIAL FORM
                                                           KI-TEI (COMPULSORY) SCORING FORM

    AKA (RED Athlete's Team No.                                                                                  SHIR
             POOR            BELOW     AVG.      ABOVE         GOOD      VERY GOOC             SCORE                        P             BELOW                                      VERY GOO          SCORE
    ~                         AVG.                AVG.                                                           ~                         AVG.
    w                                                                                                            w
               4.0             5.0      6.0         7.0          8.0            9.0       +)                     :;           4.0            5.0      6.0                 8.0               9.0       +)
    ~        .1 .2.3
             .4 .5 .6
                             .1 .2.3
                             .4.5.6
                                       1.2.3
                                       4.5.6
                                                  .1 .2.3
                                                  .4.5.6
                                                               .1.2.3
                                                               .4.5.6
                                                                              .1 .2.3
                                                                              .4.5.6
                                                                                                       CD        a::
                                                                                                                 ~
                                                                                                                            .1 .2.3
                                                                                                                            .4 .5.6
                                                                                                                                           .1 .2.3
                                                                                                                                           .4.5.6
                                                                                                                                                     1 .2.3
                                                                                                                                                     4 .5 .6
                                                                                                                                                                        .1 .2.3
                                                                                                                                                                        .4.5.6
                                                                                                                                                                                          .1 .2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                          .4 .5 .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                               CD
    ~        .7.8.9          .7.8.9    7.8.9      .7.8.9       .7.8.9         .7.8.9
                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                            .7 .8.9        .7.8.9    7 .8 .9            .7.8.9            .7.8.9
          FROM              SLIGHTL             ~L1GHTL                                                                FROM
                                       SAME                    GOOD                                                                                                     GOOD
          OVERVIEW           WORSE               BETTER                                   ~                            OVERVIEW
~         BODY
                              ·0.1       0         + 0.1        + 0.2
                                                                                                             ~         BODY
                                                                                                                                                                + 0.1    + 0.2
    tzw POWER
        DYNAMICS                                                                                                 tz DYNA MICS
                                         0         + 0.1        + 0.2
                                                                                                                 w POW ER                                       + 0.1    + 0.2
~                             ·0.1                                                                           ~ j!
    j!
    lJ)
    :;) FORM
    a TRANSITION              ·0.1      0          + 0.1        +0.2                                             .,
                                                                                                                 ~ FORM
                                                                                                                 c
                                                                                                                                                                + 0.1    + 0.2
    c(                                                                                                           c( TRAN                                                                                             ~
                              ·0.1      0         + 0.1         + 0.2                                                                                           + 0.1    + 0.2                                       ~
          MASTERY                                                                                                      MAST
                              - 0.1     0         + 0.1         + 0.2                                                                                           + 0.1    + 0.2

                                                                                          +/.)
                                                SUB·TOTAL       OF ADJUSTMENT                          ®                                                                                                       ®
                              SUB-TOTAL       OF BASIC POINTS(i'        +/.(2). ••••••                 CD                                    SUB·TOTAL    OF BASIC POINTS        1                             CD
                                       LOSS OF                                                                                                       LOSS OF
        MISTAKE         HESITATION                        POSITION       ETIQUETTE                                   MISTAK E         HESITATION     BALANCE
~                                      BALANCE                                            ~                  ~
    = XO.2              ex 0.1         OX 0.1             ex 0.1          = XO.2          .)                     ::J XO.2             ::J X 0.1      C' X 0.1       :: XO.1           :: XO.2

~
                                       oX 0.3                             eX 0.3
                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                     = XO.3                           C XO.3
                                       ::XO.5                             o XO.5                                                                     ::: XO.5                         o XO.5
    =                   =              ex 1.0              =
                                                                          =
                                                                                                       '3)   ~   =                                   :: x 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      =
                                                                                                                                                                                                               '3)
~                                       =                                                                    ~                                        =

                                                 FINAL SCOREC!>-G)              •••••••                                                                         FINAL SCORE®-@              •••••••

                                                                        AKA (RED)
                                                                                                       WINNE~
                                                                                                                             I
                  Team No.                         _            Judge's No.                                             _
                      Men's          Mix                        __Elimination                (1,2, 3, 4, 5) __        Final

                   VERY                         BELOW               ABOVE                        VERY
         ~                 BAD       POOR                AVG.                     GOOD                     EXCEl.     :sCORE
         w          BAD                          AVG.                AVG.                        GOOD
         :>         5.1       5.2     5.6         6.0     6.4          6.8          7.2           7.6       8.0        (+)
         «
         w                    5.3     5.7         6.1     6.5          6.9          7.3           7.7
         >
         0          ~         5.4     5.8         6.2     6.6          7.0          7.4           7.8
                    ()        5.5     5.9         6.3     6.7          7.1          7.5           7.9
                                      BAD      SLIGHTL   SAME       lIGHTL'f       GOOD          VERY
                                                                                                                      /
                       FROM
         t-          OVERVIEW                   WORSE               BETTER                       GOOD
         Z
         w         TECHNIQUE          -0.2       - 0.1     0          + 0.1         +0.2         +0.3
         ~         TIMING I MA-AI     -0.2       - 0.1     0          + 0.1         + 0.2        +0.3
         t-
         tn                                                                         + 0.2
         ..,
         :::::>    BUOOASPECT
                   CHOREOGRAPHY
                                      - 0.2
                                      - 0.2
                                                 - 0.1
                                                 - 0.1
                                                           0
                                                           0
                                                                      + 0.1
                                                                      + 0.1         + 0.2
                                                                                                 +0.3
                                                                                                 +0.3
         c
         «                                                                                              -------
                                                                                                                       (+1-)
                          SUB-TOTAL      OF ADJUSTMENT         -------------
                                                                                                                               CD
                                                                                                                       (+)
..Jtn
                              SUB-TOTAL       OF BASIC POINTS        Elimination)       1 + 2 ------------                     ®
...It-
   MASTERY                                                                                                             (+)
-z
~- IMPRESSION                                     1.3                   1.6
                                                                                                                               @)
tn°
  Q.
                              1.1      1.2        1.4     1.5           1.7            1.8        1.9        2.0
                                                                                                                       (+)
                                SUB-TOTAL     OF BASIC & SKILL POINTS (Final)                3 + 4 -----                       ®
            MISSEDOFFENSE TECHNIQUE                                             0000              XO.2
            TIME - SHORT lOVER                                                  0000             X 0.2 (PER 5 SEC.)
            HESITATIONI BREAK                                    0000000                          XO.2
            NO TODOME (FINAL)                                                                0    XO.5
            OFFENSE - OFF TARGET                                 0000000                          X 0.2
             DEFENSE- TODOME OFF TARGET                          0000000                          XO.2
             MISSED DEFENSE                                      0000000                          X 0.2
             FINGERTIPTO EYE                                      0000000                         XO.2
             DEFENSE - GRAB I CLINCH (UNNECESSARY                 0000000                         XO.2
             JOGAI                                                0000000                         X 0.2
             TODOME BY MALE TO FEMALE                             0000000                         XO.2
             OFFENSE BY FEMALE                                        000000                       X 0.2
             NO BOWING                                                          0000               XO.2
             POSITION I DIRECTION                          Y:. STEP 0          X 0.2 30° DIRECTION 0 X 0.2
                                                               SUB-TOTAL         OF PENALTY         POINTS-             (-)

                                                            FINAL SCORE
                                                            ELIMINATION0--<§),                   FINAL@@-
    AKA:                           SHIRO:                               AKA:                           SHIRO:
    ND     DETAIL     SCORE        ND   DETAIL      SCORE              ND     DETAIL        SCORE    IVD    DETAIL       SCORE
1    A                             D                              1     A                            D
2    A                             D                              2     A                            D
3    A                             D                              3     A                            D
1    D                             A                              1     D                            A
2    D                             A                              2     D                            A
3    D                             A                              3     D                            A
             TOTAl                          TOTAL                                  TOTAl                      TOTAl

            WinnerU                          WinnerLJ                          Winner!!                      Winner I J

    AKA:                            SHIRO:                              AKA:                          SHIRO:
    ND     DETAIL     SCORE        ND   DETAIL      SCORE              NO      DETAIL       SCORE    ND    DETAIL         SCORE
1    A                             D                               1    A                             D
2    A                             D                               2    A                             D
3    A                             D                               3    A                             D
1    D                             A                               1    D                             A
2    D                             A                               2    D                             A
3    D                             A                               3    D                             A
             TOTAl                          TOTAL                                  TOTAl                      TOTAl

            WinnerU                          WinnerLi                          Winner I J                     WinnerL]

             DECISION         IJ                    I                          DECISION         [J                     I

           POINTS & PENAL TV            SCORE           KEY:
1. ppon                                 10              (Point)         Ippon              0         (Penalty) Shi-kkaku     DQ
2. iNaza-ari                            4                               Waza-ari           A                   Han-soku       ®
3. Opponent Receives Chui               4               (Target)        Jo-dan              J                  Chui          &
4. Opponent Receives Kei-koku           2                               Chu-dan             C                  Kei-koku       X
5. Opponent Commits Jo-Gai              2               (Technique) Tsuki                   T                  Jo-gai         ..L
6. ppponent Receives Jikan              2                                Uchi               U                  Ten-to        I(f
7. ppponent Receives Saki               2                               Ate                 A                  Jikan         T-~
8. Jpponent Receives Nige-tai                                               Keri            K                   Saki

                                                                                                                              -
                                        2                                                                                     -;


9. Jpponent Receives Kakushi             2                                                                      Nige-tai
10. Jpponent Receives Ten-to             1                                                                      Kakushi      \7
                                                        * Example of Point
                                                          Chu-dan -- Tsuki - Waza- ari: .6CT
~            MEANING               TERM              METHOD      OF SIGNALING
    I   Beginning of match      Shobu ippon,     Verbal (no hand signal)
(0)                             Hajime

    2   Temporary stop          Yame             Open hand(s) held over - head palms
(0)                                              sideward, then brought down to the
                                                 waist in a single motion

    3   Ordering the            Motono-ichi      Arms held down, slightly in front,
(0) competitors to their                         index fingers only pointing down
        fixed positions                          toward each competitors starting
                                                 position

    4   Continue, begin         Tsuzuketc,       Arms fully extended out sideways,
(0)                             Hajime           palms open, then arms are brought in
                                                 as if to clap hands but palms do not
                                                 touch

    5   Continue (When the      Tsuzukete        Arms partially extended out sideways,
(0) match has been                               elbows slightly bent, palms open, then
        stopped other than by                    arms are brought in but palms do not
        the Shu-shin)                            touch

    6   Declaration ofWaza-     Waza-ari         A. Open hand toward scoring side
(D)     an                                       B. Hand signals indicate target and
                                                    technique or two instance of Jo-gai
                                                 C. Hand held, palms open sideways,
                                                    stopping at the opposite shoulder,
                                                    then brought downward in a
                                                    sweeping motion with the open
                                                    palm facing the front

 7      Declaration ofIppon     Ippon            A. Open hand toward scoring side
(D)                                              B. Hand signals indicate target and
                                                    technique or two instance ofWaza-
                                                    an
                                                 C. Open hand moves from opposite
                                                    hip diagonally extended above
                                                    shoulder with palm facing front

    8   Two Waza-ari's          Awasete, Ippon   A. Notice of two Waza-ari's
(D)     declared as Ippon                        B. Same signal as Ippon (No.7)
~           MEANING                       TERM          METHOD OF SIGNALING
    9   Notice of Sai-            Sai-shinpan        A. Several short, sharp whistles
(J)     shinpan                                         - then-
        (Rejudgment)                                 B. Right palm over left chest area
                                                        - then-
                                                     C. Explanation by hand signals


                                                     D. Judgment indicated by hand
                                                          signals
                                                     E. One long whistle followed by a
                                                          single sharp whistle
                                                     F. After confirmation of decision,
                                                          short whistle, then flags lowered

 10     Inform competitors        Shibaraku          Verbal (no hand signal)
(0)     that the match will
        end in 30 seconds

 II     End of the match          Sore-made          Arm held straight out with open palm
(0)                                                  facing the front

12      Indication that           Jo-gai, Nakae      Use the same signal as Yame (see No.
(I)     competitors are                              2) followed by a sweeping hand
        outside competition                          motion ordering competitors back into
        area                                         competition area

 13     Notice of Jo-gai          Aka (Shiro), Jo-   Index finger pointed at competitor and
(N)                               gai                then signaling with the same index
                                                     finger at the boundary line

14      Indication of first Jo-   Ikkai              Index finger raised toward competitor
(I)     gai (Kei-koku or                             indicates first penalty (Jo-gai, Kei-
        Chui)                                        koku or Chui)

15      Indication of second      Nikai              Index and middle fingers raised
(I)     Jo-gai (Kei-koku or                          toward competitor indicates second
        Chui)                                        penalty (Jo-gai, Kei-koku or Chui)

16      Indication ofTen-to       Aka (Shiro),       Index finger pointed at competitor
(I)     (Fall)                    Ten-to             followed by one large, complete
                                                     circular motion and then pointed down
                                                     toward floor

 17     Execution   ofTen-to      Sagaru             Index finger motioning competitor
(P)     penalty                                      directly backward to back boundary
                                                     line
~         MEANING               TERM             METHOD      OF SIGNALING
18    Notice ofKei-koku     Aka (Shiro),    A. Open hand toward penalized
(P)                         Kei-koku           competitor
                                            B. Hand signal explains reason
                                            C. Raised index finger indicates Kei-
                                               koku

19    Notice ofChui         Aka (Shiro),    A. Open hand toward penalized
(P)                         Chui               competitor
                                            B. Hand signal explains reason
                                            C. Elbow bent with index finger
                                               pointed toward competitor's chest
                                               indicates Chui

20    Notice of Han-soku    Aka (Shiro),    A. Open hand toward penalized
(P)                         Han-soku           competitor
                                            B. Hand signal explains reason
                                            C. Arm straight with index finger at
                                               face level of penalized competitor

21    Notice of Shi-kkaku   Aka (Shiro),    A. Index finger pointed toward
(P)                         Shi-kkaku          penalized competitor
                                            B. Hand signal explains reason
                                            C. Index finger raised up (at 45° angle)
                                               with elbow straight and pointing
                                               behind competitor indicates Shi-
                                               kkaku

22    Notice of no          Aka (Shiro),    A. Open hand toward penalized
(P)   competition ability   Mu-no              competitor
                                            B. Crossed open hands in front of chest
                                               in X shape

 23   Notice of Doctor's    Aka (Shiro),    A. Open hand toward injured, sick or
(N)   Stop                  Doctor's Stop      original position
                                            B. One arm vertical, one horizontal in
                                               front of chest maki"ng cross, then
                                               open hand lowered from head in
                                               downward "Yame"-like motion

 24   Notice of withdraw    Aka (Shiro),    A. Open hand toward competitor
(N)                         Ki-ken             withdrawn from competition
                                            B. Both palms open to the front, elbows
                                               bent, with hands at head level
~         MEANING                  TERM                  METHOD      OF SIGNALING
 25   Declaration of           Aka (Shiro)          After explanation by hand signals, then
(D)   winner by opponent       Shi-kkaku            declaration ofIppon (same as No.7)
      receiving Shi-kkaku,     (Han-soku, Ki-
      Han-soku, Ki-ken or      ken or Doctor's
      Doctor's Stop            Stop) Ni-Yori,
                               Shiro (Aka)
                               No-Kachi

26    Indication for                                Open hand outstretched overhead
(I)   emergencies                                   moving in a circular motion
      (violations, sickness,
      any other
      emergencies)

27    Request for Doctor       Doctor               Both hands are held above the head in a
(0)                                                 criss-cross fashion

28    Calling Fuku-shin        Fuku-shin,    Shu-   Both arms straight out, palms open face
(J)                            go                   up, followed by complete bending of
                                                    elbows simultaneously until palms face
                                                    backward

29    Calling specific         Fuku-shin            A. Index finger pointed at specific
(J)   Fuku-shin                                        Judge(s)
                                                    B. One arm straight out, palm open face
                                                       up, followed by complete bending of
                                                       elbow until palm face backward

30    Judgment                 Han-tei              A. One long whistle followed by a
(J)                                                    single, sharp whistle to request
                                                       judgments
                                                    B. One short whistle to lower the flags

 31   Declaration of           Aka (Shiro) no       Use the same signal as Ippon (See No.
(D)   victory of the Aka       Kachi                7)
      (Shiro)

32    A draw                   Hiki-wake            Both hands held, palm open sideways,
(1)                                                 cross at shoulders, then brought
                                                    downward in a criss-cross sweeping
                                                    motion palm front

33    Start of Kettei-sen      Kettei-sen,          Verbal (no hand signal)
(0)                            Hajime
~             MEANING                    TERM          METHOD      OF SIGNALING
34        Void                     Tora-nai       Arms held straight out in front of body
(J)       No point or penalty                     pointing down to waist level, palms
                                                  open facing down, then one criss-cross
                                                  motion

 35       Weak technique           Yowai          Arms straight out in front of body, open
(E)                                               palm down, then one downward arm
                                                  motion stopping at waist level

 36       Technique blocked        Uke            One vertical arm completely bent at the
(E)       or covered                              chest with the palm of the other hand
                                                  tapping the lower arm once

 37       Off target               Nuke           Arm bent at a right angle with fist
(E)                                               sweeping across lightly touching the
                                                  stomach

 38       Off distance:            Ma-ai Toh-ma   Arms straight out in front, palms open
(E)       Insufficient reach                      about 15 cm (6 inches) apart, then arms
                                                  extended out once about shoulder-width

 39       Off distance:            Ma-ai Chika-   Arms straight out in front, palms open
(E)       Too close                ma             about shoulder-width apart, then palms
                                                  moved closer to about 15 cm (6 inches)
                                                  apart

40        Poor timing              Osoi           Holding both forearms bent parallel in
(E)                                               front of the body and then moving both
                                                  arms in a quick, circular motion around
                                                  each other

    41    Simultaneous    attack   Ai-uchi        Arms in front of and parallel to body,
    (E)                                           elbows bent, with fists almost touching
                                                  each other

    42    Weak stance              Tachi          Fingertips touching in front of chest to
    (E)                                           form triangle shape

    43    Snap back hand           Snap back      Extend fist then make snap back motion
    (E)   technique (Tsuki,
          Uchi, Ate)

    44    No snap in striking      Furi-Uchi      Make fist, elbow straight, swing arm
    (E)   technique                               from side to side
~         MEANING                     TERM         METHOD       OF SIGNALING
45    No knee snap or          Furi-Geri      Make fist, swing arm with elbow
(E)   thrust kicking                          straight from hip to above head

46    Pushing technique        Oshi           Palm open to front, fingers up, hand
(E)                                           pushing forward

47    For technique with       Nige-Tsuki     One arm swinging once from side of
(E)   opposite body            (punch)        body, forward and then backward
      momentum                 Nige-Uchi
      (technique moves in      (strike)
      one direction with       Nige-Ate
      the body retreating in   (smash)
      the opposite             Nige-Geri
      direction)               (kick)

48    Use of incorrect         Fu-teki        Open palm placed on top of other hand
(E)   striking part

49    Faster technique         Aka (Shiro),   One arm bent completely at the elbow,
(E)                            Hayai          palm up, at a right angle to the body
                                              with the other arm, indicating the faster
                                              side coming across, palm flat and
                                              touching the side of the elbow

50    Grab/Clinch              Tsuka-mi       An open hand extended out then closing
(E)                                           in a grabbing gesture

51    Contact                  Ate            A fist touching the side of the face
(E)

52    Prohibited or            Kin-shi        Open hand palm down, fingers together
(E)   dangerous contact                       thrust forward throat

53    Where a technique is     Mu-shi         One hand covering eyes
(E)   ignored (Technique
      executed ignores
      opponent's technique
      which has sufficient
      reach)

54    Ignoring the Shu-        Chui Mu-shi    Open palms covering both ears
(E)   shin's warning


55    Bad manners / Poor       Fu-kei         Open hand, palm forward with a side to
(E)   attitude                                side motion
~          MEANING                   TERM        METHOD     OF SIGNALING
 56    Sign for actions       Doji          Both arms extended frontward at
 (E)   simultaneous with                    shoulder level and then clapping hands
          -Time up                          together one time
          -Jo-gai
          -Ten-to

 57    After the fact         Ato           Both arms are held up bent at the elbow
 (E)   (Technique is                        with palms parallel at head level
       executed after Yame
       or Jo-gai, etc.)

 58    Very good timing       Yoshi         Make circular motion with arm extended
 (E)                                        in front of body

  59   Wild flurry of         Mo-da         One hand is held over eyes, other hand
 (E)   uncontrolled                         makes fist and arm extended forward at
       techniques                           stomach level

  60   Final technique is     Pressure      With arms parallel to floor, open hands,
 (E)   weak pressure to                     one palm facing up, and the other facing
       floor                                down, in front of stomach. Upper palm
                                            hits lower palm.


Remarks:
(0)      Operation of competition
(D)      Declaration of points
(J)      Judgment
(N)      Notice
(I)      Indication
(P)      Penalty
(E)      Explanation
~                     MEANING                             METHOD        OF SIGNALING
 I      Waza-ari                                 Arm, holding flag, toward corresponding
(J)                                              competitor, held straight out at side of body
                                                 parallel to the floor simultaneously blowing
                                                 one sharp whistle

 2      Ippon                                    Arm holding corresponding flag held straight
(J)                                              out at side of body 45 degree angle, then
                                                 blowing one sharp whistle

 3      Teki-kaku                                Corresponding flag for Waza-ari (see No. I) or
(J)     (Eligible technique becomes              Ippon (see No.2) with other flag covering eyes.
        point)                                   Simultaneously blow one sharp whistle

 4      Tora-nai                                 Waving the flags criss-crossing in front just
(J)     (No point or penalty)                    above the knees with several continuous sharp
                                                 whistles

 5      Mie-nai                                  Both flags held criss-crossed    covering eyes
(J)     (Did not see)

    6   Jo-gai                                   Sharp whistle with corresponding flag held
(J)     (Out of bounds)                          straight down (For simultaneous Jo-gai, both
                                                 flags are held straight down)

 7      Ten-to                                   Sharp whistles with corresponding flag pointed
(J)     (Fall)                                   at competitor followed by one large, complete
                                                 circular motion and then pointed down toward
                                                 floor

    8   Signal for emergencies                   Several continuous, sharp whistles while
(0)     (Violations, injuries, sickness,         holding corresponding flag overhead
        any other emergencies)

    9   Doctor                                   Flags are held criss-crossed    above head
(0)     (Request for Doctor)

 10     Ate                                      Corresponding    flag tip is held touching the side
(E)     (Contact)                                of the face

 II     Chui Mu-shi                              Simultaneous    motion of both flags to cover the
(E)     (Ignoring the Shu-shin's                 ears
        warning)

 12     Kin-shi                                  Top of corresponding    flag brought toward
(E)     (Prohibited   or dangerous    actions)   throat

 13     Mu-no                                    Use both flags, crossing arms in front of chest
(E)     (No competition    ability)
~                      MEANING                           METHOD      OF SIGNALING
    14    Fu-kei                                Corresponding flag held at a right angle with
(E)       (Bad manners / Poor attitude)         elbow in front of body; flag moved side to side

IS        Mu-shi                                Corresponding   flag held up covering eyes
(E)       (Where a technique      is ignored)

    16    Tsuka-mi                              Both flags held together in one hand while the
(E)       (Grab / Clinch)                       other hand grabs the two flags

17        Aka (Shiro) no Kachi                  Same signal as Ippon (see No.2)     except that
(1)       (Winner)                              there is no whistle

18        Hiki-wake                             Both flags crossed above the head
(J)       (Draw)

    19    Yowai                                 Arm straight out in front parallel to floor at
(E)       (Weak technique)                      waist level then moved downward toward
                                                knees

20        Uke                                   One flag held up, elbow bent close to body, and
(E)       (Technique     blocked or covered)    the other held sideways parallel to floor moving
                                                to touch first flag

21        Nuke                                  Arm bent at a right angle with flag sweeping
(E)       (Off target)                          across the stomach

    22    Ma-ai (Off distance) Toh-ma           Arms holding flags straight out in front about
(E)       (Insufficient reach)                  IS cm (6 inches) apart, then arms extend out
                                                about shoulder width

    23    Ma-ai (Off distance) Chika-ma         Arms holding flags straight out in front about
(E)       (Too close)                           shoulder width, then arms moved closer to
                                                about 15 cm (6 inches) apart

    24    Osoi                                  Holding the corresponding flag in each hand,
(E)       (Poor timing)                         with the arms bent parallel in front of the body.
                                                Arms move in a quick circular motion around
                                                each other

    25    Ai-uchi                               Both flags held in front at waist level with
(E)       (Simultaneous     attack)             elbows bent, flag tips touching

    26    Tachi                                 Both flags in front of chest forming triangle
    (E)   (Weak stance)

    27    Snap-back                             Corresponding flag moved from chest forward
    (E)   (hand technique)                      in snapping / punching action

    28    Furi-Uchi                             Corresponding flag held straight to front, then
    (E)   (No snap in striking)                 swinging up to the side at shoulder level
~                MEANING                            METHOD       OF SIGNALING
 29    Furi-Geri                            With elbow straight, corresponding flag arm
 (E)   (No snap or thrust action in         swings upwards from low to high position
       kicking)
  30   Oshi                                 Hold respective side flag vertical to ground
 (E)   (Pushing technique)                  then push away outward from body
  31   Nige                                 Corresponding flag held in one hand, arm held
 (E)   (Technique with opposite body        forward and the swinging once backward over
       momentum)                            the shoulder
 32    Fu-teki                              Corresponding flag tapping top of opposite
 (E)   (Incorrect use of body part)         hand
 33    Hayai                                One arm bent completely at the elbow, held
 (E)   (Faster technique)                   close to the body, palm up, with the other arm
                                            coming across, flag in hand, with the tip of the
                                            flag touching the side of the other flag
  34   Doji                                 Both arms extended frontward at shoulder
 (E)   (Simultaneous actions with           level, flags in hands, and then bringing both
       Time-up or Jo-gai)                   flags together once in a kind of clapping
                                            motion
  35   Ato                                  Holding the corresponding flag in each hand,
 (E)   (After the fact; Technique is        then moving both arms upward bent at the
       executed after Yame, Jo-gai, etc.)   elbow with palms parallel at head level
 36    Yoshi                                With corresponding flag extended in front of
 (E)   (Very good timing)                   body, make circular motion with tip of flag
 37    Mo-da                                One flag covers eyes, other flag extended
 (E)   (Wild flurry of uncontrolled         forward at stomach level
       techniques)
 38    Pressure                             One flag in front of stomach, arm parallel to
 (E)   (Final technique is weak pressure    floor, other flag (side executing technique)
       to floor)                            hitting down on side of flag


Remarks:
(J)      Judgment
(0)      Operation of competition
(E)      Explanation
